[Amit Varma]: How often do you look around yourself and think, this was not supposed to happen? If
[Amit Varma]: you live in India, there is actually much reason to do just that. We were not supposed
[Amit Varma]: to be here. India was not supposed to be the vibrant, diverse democracy that it is today.
[Amit Varma]: Indeed, one of the core rationalizations of colonialism was, these people cannot govern
[Amit Varma]: themselves. And yet, here we are, a functioning democracy for over 70 years. And a big part
[Amit Varma]: of this is our constitution, which not only shaped our systems of governance and the rules
[Amit Varma]: of the game, but also shaped how all of us think about our country and our own role in
[Amit Varma]: it. Now, there is much that I find wrong with our constitution. It does not go far enough
[Amit Varma]: to protect individual rights. It is way too long and that dilutes its utility, yada, yada,
[Amit Varma]: yada. It is also true that our constitution takes many elements from other constitutions
[Amit Varma]: and that a chunk of it is a reproduction of the Government of India Act of 1935. It is
[Amit Varma]: also true that some of the values it pays homage to could be called enlightenment values
[Amit Varma]: and many of the founders were influenced by great thinkers of the West. But it is not,
[Amit Varma]: as many have alleged in the past, a copy-paste job. The impetus behind it, what the author
[Amit Varma]: Madhav Khosla calls, quote, the cultivation of democratic citizenship, stop quote, was
[Amit Varma]: unique to our circumstances and no aspect of our constitution was blindly copied from
[Amit Varma]: elsewhere. There was much debate, much thought given to every element of our constitution,
[Amit Varma]: not just the what, but also the why. And these debates are fascinating for anyone who wants
[Amit Varma]: to understand not just this imperfect and mutating document that is our guiding light,
[Amit Varma]: but also why it is the way it is and why we are the way we are.
[Unknown]: Welcome to The Seen and the Unseen, our weekly podcast on economics, politics and behavioural
[Amit Varma]: science. Please welcome your host, Amit Verma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to The Seen and the Unseen. My guest today is Madhav Khosla, who has written a
[Amit Varma]: wonderful book called India's Founding Moment, a remarkable work of scholarship that made
[Amit Varma]: me look at our constitution and our history in a different light. At a personal level,
[Amit Varma]: the fact that Madhav is here is an illustration of how my own intellectual curiosity is driven
[Amit Varma]: by the show. It was Srinath Raghavan, a frequent guest on The Seen and the Unseen, who first
[Amit Varma]: recommended Madhav's work to me and insisted that I must read him and indeed invite him
[Amit Varma]: to the show. Another frequent guest, the constitutional economist Shruti Rajgopalan told me that Madhav
[Amit Varma]: is India's finest historian of the constitution. And when I read India's founding moment, I
[Amit Varma]: realised that some of the things that I have said and thought in the past about our constitution
[Amit Varma]: and our history was not as nuanced as it could have been. I felt as if my brain expanded
[Amit Varma]: when I read this book. And indeed, that's the exact purpose of The Seen and the Unseen.
[Amit Varma]: Before I begin my conversation with Madhav though, let's take a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: If you're listening to The Seen and the Unseen, it means you like listening to audio and you're
[Amit Varma]: thirsty for knowledge. That being the case, I'd urge you to check out Storytel, the sponsors
[Amit Varma]: of this episode. Storytel is an audiobook platform that has a massive range of audiobooks
[Amit Varma]: from around the world. Their international collection is stellar, but so is a local collection.
[Amit Varma]: They have a fantastic range of Marathi and Hindi audiobooks. What's more, I do a weekly
[Amit Varma]: podcast there called The Book Club with Amit Verma, in which I talk about one book every
[Amit Varma]: week, giving context, giving you a taste of it, and so on. Download that app and listen
[Amit Varma]: to my show. And as long as Storytel sponsors this show within this commercial itself, I
[Amit Varma]: will recommend an audiobook that I liked on that platform every week. My recommendation
[Amit Varma]: for this week is Invisible People by Harsh Mandar, a collection of stories about unsung
[Amit Varma]: heroes of India who are otherwise invisible to us, often because of their class, caste
[Amit Varma]: or gender. You can now listen to the full book on Storytel, Invisible People by Harsh
[Amit Varma]: Mandar. Download the Storytel app or visit Storytel.com. Remember that Storytel with
[Amit Varma]: a single L. Storytel.com. Madhav, welcome to the scene and the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: Thanks so much, Amit. Great to be here. Madhav, as we, you know, before we begin talking about
[Amit Varma]: your book, tell me a little bit about your journey. Like, are you into law? Are you into
[Amit Varma]: history? How did sort of all of this happen where, you know, you got drawn to firstly
[Amit Varma]: this field and then to this specific subject of inquiry?
[Guest]: I studied law as an undergraduate at the National Law School in Bangalore, and I then studied
[Guest]: law at the graduate level at Yale. And it became clear to me at some point that a lot
[Guest]: of the questions I was most interested in could not be answered entirely through legal
[Guest]: training, that in some way law necessarily interacts with a set of other disciplines.
[Guest]: And because my primary interest was in constitutional law, the most obvious cognate field was political
[Guest]: theory, because constitutional law engages with politics in a profound way. And political
[Guest]: theory gives you the skills and the training and the knowledge to think about the deepest
[Guest]: questions in politics. And so it, it just it kind of became a natural step that I would
[Amit Varma]: go into a PhD in political theory.
[Amit Varma]: And you got into law, you got interested in political theory, but your book is also a
[Amit Varma]: book of history. So how does that happen when you realize that not just historical reading,
[Amit Varma]: but then if you want to also write about this, which is one way of expanding your own understanding,
[Amit Varma]: then you also have to sort of get into history. How was that process? Did you come to history
[Amit Varma]: out of the love for history or out of necessity?
[Guest]: I mean, I think I came to it actually out of an interest in thinking about how ideas
[Guest]: had changed and had traveled over time. So when you're studying political theory, one
[Guest]: of the things that you think about, and when you're a student in those ways, is you think
[Guest]: about certain concepts, right? Equality, freedom, democracy. And the interesting thing that
[Guest]: you might ask is, what do these terms mean over time? What do these terms mean to different
[Guest]: people? And so a lot of my questions began to have a historical texture to them, a historical
[Guest]: color to them. And so I wouldn't say that I'm a professional historian in the straightforward
[Guest]: sense of the term. But I would say that I'm somebody who's interested in the history of
[Guest]: political thought, right? And so it's very much an intellectual history or a history
[Guest]: of ideas that really, in some sense, sparked my curiosity.
[Amit Varma]: And who are the sort of the thinkers who influenced you? Or as you, you know, got deeper and deeper
[Amit Varma]: into these subjects, what are the books that you looked at as models of the kind of work
[Amit Varma]: that you'd like to do?
[Guest]: I think if one thinks about India, in particular, I think the most familiar thinkers who we
[Guest]: have, who do a kind of intellectual history or history of political thought, are people
[Guest]: like Pratap Bhanu Mehta, Sunil Khilnani, Nija Gopal Jayal. And I think slightly more limited
[Guest]: to the scholarly domain and less familiar in popular writing is somebody like Sudipto
[Guest]: Kaviraj. And what all of these people are doing in some way is to think about, look,
[Guest]: you have a concept. And what does that concept mean to specific people at particular moments
[Guest]: in time? And how can we recover certain understandings of that concept? If I actually can read about
[Guest]: what somebody like Nehru thought about citizenship, can that help me think about citizenship today?
[Guest]: Right? Can that actually elucidate the concept in some way? And I think each of these people
[Guest]: have done that. And so Sunil's idea of India is just a marvelous attempt to think about
[Guest]: the particular idea of democracy or the particular idea of how you domesticate a certain ideal
[Guest]: within a broader public life and within political history. I think Nija's book on citizenship,
[Guest]: for example, is a way to think about varying definitions and conceptions of citizenship
[Guest]: over 100 years, right? And she is a political theorist, but it's a history of ideas, which
[Guest]: is what she's interested in. And Pratap, we read week after week, who's attempting to
[Guest]: do that.
[Amit Varma]: Sadanand Pratap is absolutely India's finest public intellectual, I think. And just referring
[Amit Varma]: to Nija's book, you know, I hadn't read it until I was going to do an episode on citizenship
[Amit Varma]: with our mutual friend Srinath. And it spoke so much to the current time. Suddenly your
[Amit Varma]: expanding of the current time just explodes and you get everything so much better because
[Amit Varma]: of a book like that. I also want to ask you about your reading and your writing. To begin
[Amit Varma]: with reading, like, you know, I often get asked, how do I read so many books? And you
[Amit Varma]: know, do I take notes, do I scheme, etc, etc. And you obviously read far more than me. I
[Amit Varma]: mean, while reading your book, one of the joys of reading your book was the ability
[Amit Varma]: to go to the footnotes and discover other things through that. And, you know, and I
[Amit Varma]: think any good book of history or nonfiction gives you that. So how do you read, you know,
[Amit Varma]: do you have to ever force yourself to read? Has the nature of the way you read changed
[Amit Varma]: since you became a scholar and a student yourself? Is there a difference between how you read
[Amit Varma]: for work and how you read for pleasure? What's your relationship with books like?
[Guest]: I think, at least to me, I feel I read quite badly, right? I feel I don't read enough,
[Guest]: and I don't concentrate enough when I read. But I think I don't read in very long spurts,
[Guest]: I actually lose attention relatively quickly. But I try very hard to actually read very
[Guest]: seriously and very carefully when I read. And so I normally never really need to read
[Guest]: twice.
[Guest]: And do you take notes and stuff while reading?
[Guest]: I do take notes. I do take notes sometimes. And sometimes I just have page numbers. But
[Guest]: I often am able to grasp what I'm reading with relative ease, if I am in the right frame
[Guest]: of mind. The challenge is in getting into that frame of mind and is actually taking
[Guest]: out a sufficient amount of time to being able to read. I think, in some ways, the hard chat,
[Guest]: the hard, I mean, in our lives now today, right, it's quite hard to actually be able
[Guest]: to turn off the internet and turn off the mobile phone, and then just say, okay, I'm
[Guest]: having an hour of completely uninterrupted reading, which is the kind of thing that I
[Guest]: hope for. I think the other thing that can sometimes be challenging is that you don't
[Guest]: often know what to read. Right. And so even with this book, for example, part of what
[Guest]: was difficult was, we've only had one book on India's constitutional founding before
[Guest]: this. And so there were moments where on different themes, I just, I didn't know actually what
[Guest]: to read. And then you just read more and you get to know what to read. Right. But I, my
[Guest]: life in terms of reading is not profoundly structured. I think I read a lot, I read less
[Guest]: than I would like to, probably more than I think I do. But it's, it's disorganized, it's
[Guest]: profoundly disorganized, and I think it could be much better.
[Amit Varma]: And when it comes to writing, a lot of academic writing is just hard to read, and it's dense
[Amit Varma]: and so on and so forth. Your book obviously isn't that. In fact, there were parts while
[Amit Varma]: I was reading this book, and I think I told you this before the recording and you were
[Amit Varma]: slightly embarrassed by it. There were times when I felt the quality of your prose reminded
[Amit Varma]: me of Pratap, which is the highest praise I can give really, in the sense that you're
[Amit Varma]: packing in a lot of thought and a lot of material into, you know, with a tremendous amount of
[Amit Varma]: clarity. And even though you also write long sentences like Pratap often does, you know,
[Amit Varma]: they're not unwieldy and long winding, they're packing in a lot, it all makes complete sense.
[Amit Varma]: So is that, you know, is prose style something that you thought consciously about on your
[Amit Varma]: journey to becoming a writer on these matters?
[Guest]: Yes, and I'm actually really flattered and humbled that you would identify the prose
[Guest]: as being good because I, so I spent a lot of time rewriting this book, frankly, a lot
[Guest]: of time, and I spent a lot of time removing huge amounts in it. And so the final book
[Guest]: actually had about 20-25%, even maybe 30% less than I had lying around. And the hope
[Guest]: was and the aim was that look, I much rather just say less than more. And some of that
[Guest]: is laziness, some of that is just a way to like intellectually flirt with ideas. But
[Guest]: I also just didn't want to overwrite. And I am very interested in how people write and
[Guest]: in what and rather than just what they write. And so I care a lot about that. And most of
[Guest]: the writers I admire are just beautiful writers.
[Guest]: Like?
[Guest]: I mean, I think Sunil is a great example. I think globally, I love David Bromwich's
[Guest]: writing. I read him regularly. And just there are a range of nonfiction writers who just
[Guest]: who are genuine stylists. Right. And so I think that that's, I don't know if the if
[Guest]: the book has that, but certainly I aspired to make at least parts of it beautiful to
[Amit Varma]: read.
[Amit Varma]: We're going to move on to the book now. And let's sort of move on to the conception of
[Amit Varma]: India itself and the role that our founders played in thinking about it. And you begin
[Amit Varma]: your book with a quote from Nehru, where he says, one of the unfortunate legacies of the
[Amit Varma]: past has been that there has been no imagination in the understanding of the Indian problem.
[Amit Varma]: Stop quote. So what is this Indian problem?
[Guest]: It's an interesting quote, if you think about it, right? I mean, it's the quote comes up,
[Guest]: the moment comes up in the Constituent Assembly, Nehru is speaking, and he's suddenly saying
[Guest]: that, look, actually, we aren't grappling with the situation that we are in, because
[Guest]: nobody really has realized the challenge before the Constituent Assembly. And it's an odd
[Guest]: thing to say, right? Because if you think that if you were to guess anything, you would
[Guest]: say that nobody would have a deeper sense of the situation than those people there.
[Guest]: And for Nehru, the Indian problem was, and it's interesting also that he calls it the
[Guest]: Indian problem, right? So the first thing to say about that is that he sees something
[Guest]: distinctive going on, right? It's not just the problem of another country or the problem
[Guest]: of some particular idea. It's actually an Indian problem that no country has previously
[Guest]: been asked to solve. And the Indian problem for him is the problem of how do you create
[Guest]: democracy in a place without its preconditions? So you have internalized for well over a century
[Guest]: that there is actually a certain set of circumstances that make democracy possible. And India doesn't
[Guest]: have those circumstances, and yet it needs to become a democracy. And how do you then
[Guest]: address that problem?
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, and you also at one point, and I like the phrasing of this, you put you point out
[Amit Varma]: you talk about the suggestion that human behavior was not the consequence of politics, but instead
[Amit Varma]: its cause, stop quote. And later on, you ask the question in the context of the Hobbesian
[Amit Varma]: project, quote, did politics produce these spaces of energy, these fresh ways of thinking
[Amit Varma]: about freedom, or was politics contingent on them, stop quote. And these seem to feed
[Amit Varma]: into Nehru's question in a sense of what Nehru really seems to be asking is that look, we
[Amit Varma]: have to now move towards being a democracy, but none of those conditions are there, most
[Amit Varma]: particularly the democratic citizen isn't there. So in the act of creating this democracy,
[Amit Varma]: can we create that democratic citizen? And is the constitution the tool to do that? Am
[Amit Varma]: I right in saying that this is a fundamental sort of question?
[Guest]: That's right. And just to go back to the part that you read, I mean, the way to think about
[Guest]: it is this, right? After the 19th century, you have around you three things going on.
[Guest]: You have politics as some space, right? You have the economy as some space, and you have
[Guest]: society as some space. And all these three are slightly governed by a kind of different
[Guest]: logic, right? So society say might have its own kind of relations, it might have its own
[Guest]: kind of power dynamics, it might have its own kind of freedom. The market, again, has
[Guest]: its own kind of logic, its own kind of structures, its own kind of opportunities. And then there's
[Guest]: politics, which is again governed by its own rationality. And this distinction between
[Guest]: the three really comes out in the 19th century, both with the Industrial Revolution, and with
[Guest]: the birth of actually sociology. And what happens for people is that they begin to ask,
[Guest]: and it's a natural question, it's not coming out of deep seated Western racism, it's actually
[Guest]: coming out of a very honest inquiry. They begin to ask that, look, is politics going
[Guest]: to rest on how these other spaces are? Or is actually politics producing these spaces?
[Guest]: Is the caste system the consequence of the political structure we inhabit? Or is the
[Guest]: political structure we inhabit going to take a certain shape because of the caste system?
[Guest]: And that is not an easy question to answer, right? And the British answer to that was
[Guest]: look, because India has a certain kind of society, it can only have a certain kind of
[Guest]: government, right? And the Nehruvian sort of answer, which places politics front and
[Guest]: center, and the Indian answer, right, is that look, actually, everything that you've gotten
[Guest]: is because of the politics that you've had. People are behaving in a certain way, because
[Guest]: you've actually put them in structures where they will behave in that way. And a version
[Guest]: of it, for example, is, you know, in contemporary India, just to sort of switch for a moment,
[Guest]: sometimes people will say, look, there are communal people, this is why we have a communal
[Guest]: politics, right? And one answer to that is, actually, you run a communal politics, you
[Guest]: get a communal people. You run a secular politics, you get a secular people, right? And that's
[Guest]: kind of the answer here, in some ways.
[Amit Varma]: So there are sort of two aspects to this, which I find interesting. One, of course,
[Amit Varma]: is that I would sort of agree with Nehru that obviously, though he would not have phrased
[Amit Varma]: it like this, but people respond to incentives. So if you create a form of government that
[Amit Varma]: creates certain sets of incentives, people will necessarily respond to that. In fact,
[Amit Varma]: my thesis of, you know, Jagdish Bhagwati had once said that Indians are more into rent
[Amit Varma]: seeking while the Chinese are intuitively more into profit seeking. And that sense of
[Amit Varma]: why Indians are more into rent seeking, that is, we are always looking for ways to make
[Amit Varma]: a fast buck or cheat someone or whatever, is that because the oppressive state made
[Amit Varma]: it so hard for so many decades to earn an honest living. And because it was the easiest
[Amit Varma]: way to make money was through rent seeking and was through sort of becoming a part of
[Amit Varma]: that structure. People instinctively think in those terms. And you could say that as
[Amit Varma]: people responding to the incentives of the system of governance upon them, and this can
[Amit Varma]: work in the other direction. I mean, I give a negative example, but this can work in the
[Amit Varma]: other way also where you can promote fraternity and, you know, much more tolerance just through
[Amit Varma]: what the law happens to be and how it's all structured. But the counterpoint to that would
[Amit Varma]: be that, you know, and a point at where Gandhi, for example, disagreed with Nehru and Ambedkar
[Amit Varma]: and where conservatives would disagree, and you had the same argument playing out elsewhere
[Amit Varma]: between Burke and Paine and so on, is that Gandhi sort of felt that the locus of change
[Amit Varma]: was society itself, that change would only happen bottom up. And Nehru and Ambedkar,
[Amit Varma]: on the other hand, felt that no, you know, it's the diseases such as I mean, caste is
[Amit Varma]: a disease in our society. And the diseases are so deeply rooted, that that change cannot
[Amit Varma]: happen from the bottom up, the state has to sort of lead the way. And so this is the sort
[Amit Varma]: of debate that's playing. This is one of the fundamental debates that you've sort of identified
[Guest]: playing out, isn't it? Absolutely. I think that debates about a strong centralized state
[Guest]: in the ultimate analysis are debates about very different conceptions of Indian society.
[Guest]: Right. So Ambedkar and Nehru are fierce critics of Ambedkar of Indian society. And it's in
[Guest]: part their criticism of Indian society that makes them so radical. Gandhi, on the other
[Guest]: hand, is to an extent critical of the practices of Indian society. But he also believes that
[Guest]: the change will come from within, that the change has to come from within. And that actually
[Guest]: enduring change will rest on certain kinds of practices. It will rest on genuine examples
[Guest]: that you have to provide in your social life that will pave the way. And both of them,
[Guest]: therefore, there isn't really a meeting point for people whose presuppositions are so distinct
[Guest]: about the dynamic and the theory of historical change.
[Amit Varma]: And one question I've asked many guests on the show, so it will almost seem like a cliche
[Amit Varma]: to my listeners, is something that I feel you're best equipped to answer, which is that
[Amit Varma]: it seems to me that what we did, and that speaks to this earlier debate, which we mentioned,
[Amit Varma]: you know, between conservatives and people who would want to use the state to transform
[Amit Varma]: society, which is that what we seem to have done is we seem to have imposed a liberal
[Amit Varma]: constitution on an illiberal society. And one could ask, is that imposition itself liberal,
[Amit Varma]: but a more pertinent question in current times when many people say that society has caught
[Amit Varma]: up with politics and that our illiberal society is now reflected in the sort of politics that
[Amit Varma]: we have, is that can such top-down imposition of values ever actually work?
[Guest]: So that's a very packed question, right? And let's separate it at multiple levels. So the
[Guest]: first thing to think about is, do we actually think it's true that we've imposed a liberal
[Guest]: constitution on a people who are not liberal? Because the word imposed there is very interesting,
[Guest]: right? And I'm not sure that it's actually a very good word to use for the following
[Guest]: reason. On the one hand, clearly the people who were in the Constituent Assembly had a
[Guest]: vision of India that was not the current vision of India. That is the whole Indian problem,
[Guest]: right? They needed to create democracy and India was not filled with democratic values
[Guest]: and constitutional principles. In that sense, they were radicals, they were revolutionary.
[Guest]: But the Constituent Assembly enjoyed extraordinary political legitimacy, even though the body
[Guest]: was not actually voted in through universal adult franchise. It was unquestioned in its
[Guest]: authority and in its leadership. In that sense, imposed has a slightly more authoritarian
[Guest]: cast to it, which I'm not sure actually is accurate given the real power that the Assembly
[Guest]: enjoyed. In fact, if the Assembly didn't enjoy that power, you wouldn't have gotten the constitution.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, it's not power, but I'd say the key word there is not power, but legitimacy. And
[Amit Varma]: I'm willing to concede that it had legitimacy, that these were the recognized leaders of
[Amit Varma]: the day. They had won elections before under the British. So, I don't have an issue with
[Amit Varma]: that. But I think that any constitution they came up with would have been an imposition,
[Amit Varma]: not necessarily this one and a necessary imposition because there's no other way of doing it.
[Guest]: Yeah, I mean, so we can quibble about whether the word imposition is right, right? I'm just
[Guest]: not sure. I'm not sure whether it's the correct word. And I think the other thing that we
[Guest]: need to remember is this, that the constitution puts forth a really relaxed procedure for
[Guest]: amendment, a really relaxed procedure for change. The constitution is given in 1950.
[Guest]: In 1951, you have elections, the whole country can vote. For the first time in human history,
[Guest]: you're granted universal adult franchise under these conditions. And the body that is voted
[Guest]: in could have gotten rid of the constitution. So, in that sense, it's a genuinely democratic
[Guest]: moment, right? And the second question, right, which is that look, actually, has society
[Guest]: caught up with politics? I actually think, ironically enough, the present moment reveals
[Guest]: just the opposite. I think the Indian founding was built on the idea that to be in the modern
[Guest]: world, right, as opposed to to be in the ancient world, or to be in the medieval world, means
[Guest]: that your world can be entirely constructed. It means that when Amit Verma is born, he
[Guest]: could be any type of person. His job, his identity, his role in life are subject to
[Guest]: change at an individual level. And the whole world can be made and remade. And what politics
[Guest]: offers us is a way to make and remake our world through nonviolent means, right, unlike
[Guest]: war. Now, the interesting thing about the current moment is that actually, I think even
[Guest]: though the current Indian, the dominant mode of Indian politics at the moment, the Hindu
[Guest]: nationalist movement is very different from the founding vision, and could not be more
[Guest]: different from the founding vision. They share this belief that the world can be entirely
[Guest]: remade, because they are actually attempting to remake it. If they didn't want to remake
[Guest]: it, if they didn't actually think that if they didn't act, if they thought that the
[Guest]: world was already like this, then there's no need to remake it. And if they thought
[Guest]: that it could not be remade this way, then there's no need to remake it. They believe
[Guest]: in the absolutism and the primacy of politics, as much as anything. It's why they are changing
[Amit Varma]: our laws. So isn't this belief in remaking the world actually a very dangerous belief?
[Amit Varma]: I mean, we've seen this in the 20th century and Mao and Hitler and Stalin and so on. And
[Amit Varma]: in fact, when Modi did demonetization, I compared it with the Mao's Great Leap Forward and what
[Amit Varma]: Mao did with the Sparrows. You know, isn't this kind of social engineering always doomed
[Amit Varma]: to fail and equally disrespectful of the society you're claiming to represent? For example,
[Amit Varma]: just as you said, if I may add to that, just as you said that the founders of our constitution
[Amit Varma]: were radicals, in a similar sense, it could be argued that the Hindu nationalist movement
[Amit Varma]: today are also radicals, because they are chipping away at the tolerance and inclusiveness
[Amit Varma]: that is such an inherent part of our society.
[Guest]: I think that that's right. I think that in the way they are radicals, I think that it
[Guest]: doesn't mean that you're disrespecting society because it's all done through social legitimacy.
[Guest]: So I don't think that's quite right. I think that the question isn't, is it dangerous or
[Guest]: not? It is dangerous, Amit, because in the same way as it is dangerous to rule yourselves.
[Guest]: That's what it means to be independent. That's what it means to have freedom. When I look
[Guest]: at you and I say, Amit Verma, you can have any career you want, if you work hard, and
[Guest]: I give you the right education and you pick your career. Is that dangerous? Yes. You could
[Amit Varma]: do a terrible job with it. No, I think there's a conflation here. My belief in individual
[Amit Varma]: rights and in my agency to shape my own destiny is very different from the freedom of a society
[Amit Varma]: to sort of or the freedom of a political class to transform society through laws.
[Guest]: But I think that that's what it means to be democratic. It's collective agency. The question
[Guest]: then is twofold. Firstly, what are the processes by which we engineer? Right. And so, for instance,
[Guest]: the Indian founding is a dramatic effort to engineer things through civil, nonviolent
[Guest]: means. Right. So even things like modernization, which I discuss in the book, they are clearly
[Guest]: impressed by and who wouldn't be at the time by Soviet Russia's extraordinary economic
[Guest]: growth. But they think that there are serious problems with the means and we care about
[Guest]: the means because the means themselves are constitutive of freedom. So there's one question,
[Guest]: which is the question of how are you engineering? And the second question is, to what end are
[Guest]: you engineering? And are you actually engineering towards an end that still treats people as
[Guest]: free and equal beings? Because the whole purpose of actually giving freedom is that you're
[Guest]: treating people as free and equal beings in some way. Right. And so I think that the danger
[Guest]: of the present moment isn't that they're trying to remake the world. I think everybody's trying
[Guest]: to remake the world. In fact, I think that the most gratifying and reassuring thing about
[Guest]: politics is that it can be a space for possibility. I think what's scary is how they are doing
[Guest]: it and what they are doing it towards. Right. In fact, I think it's not only and I think
[Guest]: what that captures is that in politics, Amit, what's dangerous is not only extremism, but
[Guest]: cynicism. I think it's cynicism above all. And I think on India's left, for example,
[Guest]: or on India's a lot of other Indian political spectrum, that's the danger. Right. For instance,
[Guest]: why is our caste arrangement moved from a constitutional arrangement that wanted to
[Guest]: transcend caste to a situation now where it is simply power sharing between different
[Guest]: caste groups? Because you don't think caste can be eradicated. So that's cynicism. And
[Guest]: that's actually what's dangerous. So what's dangerous isn't that these guys want to change
[Guest]: the world. What's dangerous is what they want to change it to and how they plan to change
[Amit Varma]: it. Well, yeah, I mean, but that's also a disagreement on ends and not so much a disagreement
[Amit Varma]: on means. Let's kind of get back to your book where you write about where you know how one
[Amit Varma]: of the fundamental decisions in hindsight, it kind of we take it so much for granted.
[Amit Varma]: But one of the unusual decisions that was debated and was a question of universal suffrage.
[Amit Varma]: That's right. Tell me a little bit about the contours of that particular debate. So I think
[Guest]: to think about that, I mean, what we need to think about is that look, in the middle
[Guest]: of the 20th century, you have to be really audacious to think that India can be a democracy.
[Guest]: A for 100 years, you've had this kind of political theory and philosophy. You've had this imperial
[Guest]: vision that India cannot rule itself. Then you've had alongside that, right, a real life
[Guest]: experience of democracy going wrong. So the only moment in world history where democratization
[Guest]: and constitution making occur simultaneously is in Europe during the interwar period. And
[Guest]: all of those countries collapse. All of those countries actually don't end up becoming democracies,
[Guest]: right, in a sustainable way. And so there are very good reasons and India's founding
[Guest]: to think, look, democracy isn't really a very good system to go for. And they still go for
[Guest]: it, right. And I think that they go for it for a variety of reasons, right? One, I think
[Guest]: there is genuinely a mass movement behind independence. Second, there is the sense that
[Guest]: actually this is what freedom means. There is a deep ideological conception that look,
[Guest]: in an earlier generation, in the late 18th century, when you had the American and French
[Guest]: revolutions, you didn't have to worry about how certain people will vote because you didn't
[Guest]: give them the vote. Now, actually, they think that look, that can't mean freedom. Freedom
[Guest]: can't just mean that I'm free from Britain, but I'm not giving my Indians the vote. And
[Guest]: there's a sense that look, in the Indian context, actually, what does that mean? In fact, there's
[Guest]: a great moment in the Constituent Assembly debates, I think, where Aladi Krishnaswami
[Guest]: Iyer says, look, what does it mean to limit suffrage in a country where most people are
[Guest]: poor? That means nobody will have suffrage at all.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I think his point, as you've quoted him in the book is that if you, you know,
[Amit Varma]: qualifications based on property or education are impossible, because most people have neither.
[Guest]: Exactly. And I think it's but it's also the deep seated ideological vision, that actually,
[Guest]: if you put people in a certain kind of system, you will get democratic people, that actually,
[Guest]: you will create democratic citizens through the practices of democracy, that itself will
[Guest]: provide the education necessary. And therefore, it doesn't mean that certain facts are false,
[Guest]: right. So of course, it's true that India is a diverse place. It has many religions
[Guest]: that is true, both for the British and for now. The question is, what does that mean
[Guest]: for political life? Right? And the answer is, actually, it may not mean anything, you
[Guest]: can still see each other as equal people, if you put them in a politics that shapes
[Guest]: them as equal people. And so at the heart of the book, I think, and at the heart of
[Guest]: the Indian founding, is the sentiment that look, representation will create its own reality.
[Guest]: The minute you represent people in a certain way, the minute you actually put them in a
[Guest]: kind of constitutional, legal, institutional model, that represents them in a certain way,
[Guest]: you will actually get the people you represent.
[Amit Varma]: And this struck me as one of the sort of profound insights that I learned from your book, which
[Amit Varma]: is that the framers of the constitution looked at it as a pedagogical tool. It wasn't simply
[Amit Varma]: a question of saying, okay, we have to govern and therefore we will have a constitution
[Amit Varma]: that sets the rules of the game. Instead, the impetus is that through this constitution,
[Amit Varma]: because people respond to incentives, and again, that's my language, not theirs, obviously,
[Amit Varma]: that through this constitution, because people respond to incentives into the system that
[Amit Varma]: they are part of, if we frame a constitution correctly, then the citizen can learn to see
[Amit Varma]: himself as a democratic citizen, and equal to all other citizens, you know, therefore
[Amit Varma]: invalidating other sort of forms of identity that might otherwise exist. And therefore,
[Amit Varma]: in that framing, it's important to embody that sort of conception of how the founders
[Amit Varma]: saw the country. And this seems to give the lie to what, you know, the traditional notions
[Amit Varma]: of the constitution that you've referred to as being, as you say, in your book, a series
[Amit Varma]: of self-interested compromises and arrangements between the Raj and locals, stop quote, as
[Amit Varma]: if it was just happenstance as if it emerged piecemeal, take this from there, take this
[Amit Varma]: from there. But, but no, there's actually this sort of unified thinking going on behind
[Guest]: it.
[Guest]: No, completely. I think that it's both a coherent, cogent project, and it's a radical project.
[Guest]: And you know, one of the things, Amit, that's been very interesting, right, is look, it's
[Guest]: 2020. It's 70 years of India's constitution. And you only had one book on the founding,
[Guest]: a book in 1966 by Granville Austin. Now, when I began writing this book, my interest was
[Guest]: that, look, Granville Austin has done an excellent political history in a straight up way. This
[Guest]: person entered the room, these were the amendments, these were the debates, this was chosen for
[Guest]: ABC reason. But there was very little in Austin's book about the broader intellectual history
[Guest]: at the level of concepts and ideas and the general terrain of actually what made this
[Guest]: special in a global way, there was relatively less. Now, I began thinking that, look, there
[Guest]: must be relatively less because actually there's not that much to say, right? Like the road
[Guest]: is less traveled for a reason. Sometimes many topics have only one book with good reason.
[Guest]: Actually they should have, most topics should have zero books. And the thing is that I then
[Guest]: realized that, look, in part what's happened is people have said one of three things. They've
[Guest]: either said that, look, there's nothing special about this constitution because it's the government
[Guest]: of India Act 1935, which I think is completely wrong. The second thing that some people have
[Guest]: said is that, look, actually there's nothing special at the level of ideas because it's
[Guest]: just self-interested people who are just striking bargains, which didn't make sense to me because
[Guest]: you're going into the assembly and you're granting universal suffrage and the next year
[Guest]: you could be out. So there's clearly something else going on. And I think ideas do matter.
[Guest]: I think historical events are shaped by a combination of many things, incentives, structures,
[Guest]: circumstances, ideas, but ideas do matter, right? And that's an assumption in the book
[Guest]: that actually people do have beliefs. And the third thing is that some people think,
[Guest]: look, it doesn't matter because India didn't have a revolution at all. Actually, the site
[Guest]: of revolution is never the political, it's always the social, it's agrarian structures,
[Guest]: it's economic structures, so on and so forth. And there the implicit contrast is China,
[Guest]: right? And the thought is that, look, China had a revolution and India didn't. And clearly
[Guest]: that's not what my people think, right? The people I'm working on and the people I think
[Guest]: about. And I also don't think that that's true. I think that the constitution did transform
[Guest]: India. And I think both Nehru understands that and the current government understands
[Guest]: that. They both want to change the constitution and that you would only change something if
[Guest]: it matters. Nobody kicks a dead dog. And so I think that when I explored the reasons why
[Guest]: this had been so understudied, it struck me that there was actually something waiting
[Guest]: to be written. And what was waiting to be written was exactly what you said, is that
[Guest]: this is a moment where you have to create a democratic citizen through democratic politics.
[Guest]: In every other country, you have a level of education, social harmony, administrative
[Guest]: systems increasing, wealth, income rising. And the democratic citizen, which is to say
[Guest]: the person who behaves in a certain civic way, actually emerges and then you create
[Guest]: democratic politics. Here we have to create the democratic citizen through democratic
[Guest]: politics. And how do we do that? What is it? What are the systems that are going to make
[Guest]: people behave in one way rather than another way? That's the question.
[Amit Varma]: And you have this intriguing sentence in your book where you say, quote, a feature of this
[Amit Varma]: conception, which is a conception of democracy and the constitution. The feature of this
[Amit Varma]: conception was that popular authorization, that is the exercise of the vote, was necessary
[Amit Varma]: but insufficient for a political system to have legitimate authority. Stop quote. Can
[Amit Varma]: you elaborate on, you know, you're saying then to build this democracy, the vote is
[Amit Varma]: necessary but insufficient. What completes the picture?
[Guest]: Right, absolutely. So I think actually, Amit, this is a really important question today.
[Guest]: Because one of the things that a lot of people are grappling with today, and I get asked
[Guest]: this a lot, is look, India is still democratic? Or is it like democracy versus the constitution?
[Guest]: You know, like in our current protests, you've had a number of people picking up images of
[Guest]: the constitution, reciting the preamble. And so the question is, is there some clash? And
[Guest]: I don't think there is a clash, actually. I think that both people are articulating
[Guest]: very distinct visions of democracy. At the heart of the founding is the thought that
[Guest]: look to be in a democracy means in the first instance that you actually elect those in
[Guest]: power. But that's not enough. And why is that not enough? Right? Because if that's enough,
[Guest]: then we don't need to have a constitution at all. We just need one provision which says
[Guest]: elections every five years, people vote, end of the story, right? And the reason why that's
[Guest]: not enough is because the question arises, once people vote, and an outcome is generated,
[Guest]: why should I actually accept that outcome? What gives the state legitimacy? So the state,
[Guest]: for example, has a certain amount of exclusive legitimacy and a certain amount of authority.
[Guest]: If the police come to your house and arrest you, as opposed to some goons, you think that
[Guest]: the police speak with a different kind of moral and legal authority. Now the question
[Guest]: is what gives them that? And the answer is that what gives them that is that firstly,
[Guest]: we believe that they have been put in place through a certain process, right? So we have
[Guest]: elected people in power who are governing the police. But the second is at the level
[Guest]: of outcomes that those systems are actually treating people as free and equal beings.
[Guest]: Because if they are not, I have no reason to accept it. The state cannot claim moral
[Guest]: authority over me unless it treats me equally. And so the whole question in the Constituent
[Guest]: Assembly is, I'm going to create a state, I'm going to create authority, and I've had
[Guest]: illegitimate authority for 200 years. And what would it mean to actually create a system
[Guest]: that not only grants the right to vote, but can justify the authority of the state that
[Guest]: can actually treat people as free and equal beings? What would the meaning of that be?
[Guest]: And the whole constitution in some ways is an effort to work out that notion, right?
[Guest]: What are the structures of power that would make people behave in certain ways, such that
[Amit Varma]: the outcomes generated would be free and equal? So this sort of brings up a question which
[Amit Varma]: arises later in your book, but I'll ask it now about the clash between these two schools
[Amit Varma]: of thought and constitutionalism, that is legal constitutionalism and political constitutionalism.
[Amit Varma]: The legal constitutionalists believe that the key job of the Constitution is to lay
[Amit Varma]: down rules of the game and act as a restraint on power, and to make sure that the state
[Amit Varma]: does not overstep its limits and that it protects the individual rights of its citizens. Whereas
[Amit Varma]: political constitutionalism holds a view that no, the state must do more than that. And
[Amit Varma]: the state must actually change or improve society as it were, depending on where you
[Amit Varma]: want to run with that. And this was also a fundamental clash at the founding. And there
[Amit Varma]: were people who argued for both. And there are people who still today could say that
[Amit Varma]: we have one or the other. Can you take me a bit through the sort of debates on this?
[Guest]: Yeah, I mean, the way I think slightly different to how you describe it only in the following
[Guest]: way that people who want this, some people see the Constitution as merely an articulation
[Guest]: of democracy, right? That it's just about voting. And some people see it as something
[Guest]: much thicker, right? It grants you many more rights, it grants you many more freedoms.
[Guest]: And so there's a kind of limit on the democratic process in some sense. And I think the way
[Guest]: I frame it and the way they frame it is they say, look, what both of these debates have
[Guest]: presumed is they've already presumed a kind of democratic citizen, right? And actually
[Guest]: even to exercise the vote, the reason why we think certain constitutional principles
[Guest]: are important is because we think that that is actually essential to democracy itself.
[Guest]: So let's play it in a very simple and tangible way. For example, assume that you think, look,
[Guest]: the current government is justified in everything because it has been voted into power. Okay.
[Guest]: And that would be true for any government. Let's just say you take that view, right?
[Guest]: Then the question arises, okay, if that's true, what does that entail? That entails
[Guest]: that firstly, if it's everybody has the right to vote, okay. That means that you need to
[Guest]: have a system where actually votes are counted fairly. Yes. That means that you actually
[Guest]: have to have also a system where people can campaign equally freely. Yes. That means that
[Guest]: people, you should also say, if you care only about voting and only about those processes,
[Guest]: that people have to be able to deliberate during the process because then they can only
[Guest]: then they can vote freely. They have to be able to read and write. They have to be able
[Guest]: to think about the choices they are making. If you do all those things, you get a lot
[Guest]: of freedoms anyway. And then the question arises, okay, the government is legitimate
[Guest]: because it is voted in. Is it then legitimate for it to say that X group of the population
[Guest]: are no longer on the voter list? You could say, no, that may not be right because it
[Guest]: needs to still preserve the process of voting in, right? So it needs, it can't disenfranchise
[Guest]: anybody, right? But the question is, okay, if it can't disenfranchise, what else can
[Guest]: it not do? Can it stop them from talking? Can it arrest them without? So a lot you can
[Guest]: get in by just realizing that even to express sovereignty, you need certain rights and conditions.
[Guest]: And the problem with the Indian founding is those rights and conditions and that knowledge
[Guest]: and understanding doesn't exist in Indian society, right? The ultimate thing is that
[Guest]: you think when people vote in a genuinely democratic society, they are thinking about
[Guest]: the common good. They are thinking about the collective good. They are not seeing you as
[Guest]: belonging to X village, Y caste, C religion. They are actually seeing you as citizens.
[Guest]: That's what it means to have a democratic sensibility, right? That you actually become
[Guest]: a different kind of person in how you see the other person. And the question in India's
[Guest]: constitutional founding is what kind of apparatus, what kind of computer program can I put the
[Guest]: people in that they begin to see other people like that? What system will change that? Because
[Guest]: in our current politics, they only see people like that, current politics at that time,
[Guest]: and that cannot enable democracy, because that cannot enable a common good and that
[Guest]: cannot enable a sustainable political environment.
[Amit Varma]: So what you're saying is that even if the argument for legal constitutionalism were
[Amit Varma]: to be true, that a government should exist only to protect the rights of democratic citizens
[Amit Varma]: and not actually try to reshape society, the argument cannot hold unless you actually have
[Unknown]: democratic citizens and a democratic society. Absolutely. That's a precondition. Absolutely.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, the constitution has to venture beyond mere legal constitutionalism.
[Guest]: Completely. I mean, a lot of the debates in the West are debates that have already presumed
[Guest]: a certain level of society, right? I mean, you see this, for example, even in our debates
[Guest]: in the West around things like hate speech, right? You may say, oh, if I have a perfectly
[Guest]: ordered society, you know, is it okay to let people abuse one another? I mean, the question
[Guest]: is, how do you get a perfectly ordered society? That's the puzzle, right?
[Amit Varma]: Right. Let's sort of talk about now, you know, you've got three chapters, and you're looking
[Amit Varma]: at three thematic ways in which there were ideological arguments about what the constitution
[Amit Varma]: should be like. And the first argument is about codification. Now, obviously, we have
[Amit Varma]: everyone knows the longest constitution in the world, it is an unwieldy beast, you know,
[Amit Varma]: you can fit the American Constitution into the pocket of your shirt. But you cannot really
[Amit Varma]: do that with the Indian Constitution, unless you have some pretty mighty pecs. And this
[Amit Varma]: is not something that sort of, like, as some may presume happened by default, that everybody
[Amit Varma]: just put in whatever they wanted, and you ended up with something really long. This
[Amit Varma]: was deliberate, there was a reasoning for this, there was a debate behind this, tell
[Amit Varma]: me a bit about that.
[Guest]: And no, so I think, I think you're absolutely right. I mean, my you know, years ago, I wrote
[Guest]: a short introduction to the Indian Constitution, which I think is shorter than the document.
[Guest]: Okay, right. And so somebody suggested to me, oh, you should have an appendix to the
[Guest]: book with the constitution as like, you have no idea, like, it's going to be double the
[Guest]: length, right? The constitution is long, it is unwieldy. And the question, the most elementary
[Guest]: question to ask is, why is all this stuff there? Right? Actually, why is why are all
[Guest]: these things in the constitution, when you other constitutions don't have them. And the
[Guest]: most easy way I meant to think about this or to understand it is that in other countries,
[Guest]: all of those norms are already a given. Whereas in this constitution, you are operating under
[Guest]: the fear of profound uncertainty. After popular authorization, the question is that you suddenly
[Guest]: are going to have voters, judges, legislatures, members of the executive, all now operating
[Guest]: under conditions of popular authorization. And you have absolutely no idea how they will
[Guest]: behave. And the key thing is, they don't know how to behave. And so codification is an attempt
[Guest]: to actually explain and develop the meaning of certain rights or certain responsibilities
[Guest]: or certain rules. It's to add texture, because nothing can be given. I mean, the way to think
[Guest]: about it is that suddenly you're putting some people in a room, and you're asking them to
[Guest]: speak a new language. What is the first thing you have to do, you have to give them a very
[Guest]: long lecture on grammar. And that is basically what codification is trying to do. It is an
[Guest]: elaboration of the grammar of democracy and constitutionalism, because that doesn't exist
[Guest]: in India. And so I need to put all that in the document.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah. And there were objections raised at the time that, look, a lot of these things
[Amit Varma]: that you're detailing out are things that legislators should do, or that the executive
[Amit Varma]: should do or whatever. Why are you, you know, laying these rules out there? And the counter
[Amit Varma]: argument was that, look, there is no established practice of doing all of these things either
[Amit Varma]: in the legislature or the judiciary or whatever. So you want to lay out as many details as
[Amit Varma]: possible. That's broadly the sort of thing.
[Guest]: That's broadly the thing. And I think that sense is also that, look, in previous countries,
[Guest]: legislatures and executive have done it already with certain preconceived ideas, right? I
[Guest]: mean, there were some attempts in the Constituent Assembly to think you're actually limiting
[Guest]: future legislators or none of that I think is actually true. I think you're just making
[Guest]: explicit what a society lacks as being implicit.
[Amit Varma]: And there was criticism even at the time that it was just increasing the coercive power
[Amit Varma]: of the state. And for example, Somnath Lahiri said, quote, none of the existing provisions
[Amit Varma]: of the powers of the executive have been done away with. Rather, in some respects, those
[Amit Varma]: powers are sought to be increased, stop quote. And he later said something to the effect
[Amit Varma]: of how the constitution looks like it has been written for a police constable at that
[Guest]: level of detail.
[Guest]: Absolutely. There are two things, right? One is there are criticisms across the board,
[Guest]: right? And that's one of the fascinating things about the Constituent Assembly debates, right?
[Guest]: If you read the Constituent Assembly debates, there's a lot of random stuff going on. But
[Guest]: what's heartening is the amount of intellectual diversity. Now, the specific part that you
[Guest]: just read out was a part negotiating a very peculiar feature in the constitution, which
[Guest]: I think a lot of us are familiar with, is that certain rights are recognized, say the
[Guest]: right to free speech. And then there are certain exceptions listed. And one of the things that
[Guest]: was said at the assembly and is often even said today is that, look, what is the meaning
[Guest]: of this? You're giving the right and then you're giving these exceptions. Now, what
[Guest]: was the answer in the assembly? The answer in the assembly was, look, this right has
[Guest]: been limited in every country. We are not doing anything new. Even in America, which is massively
[Guest]: invested in free speech, there are limitations. You have two options available. Either you
[Guest]: recognize the right and then you leave the limitations to legislators or the judiciary,
[Guest]: or you actually agree on certain established principle limitations and you just put them
[Guest]: in now. And what that does is that doesn't limit the right. If anything, it might even
[Guest]: limit the limitations because you can then say that, look, you can actually only limit
[Guest]: it on these particular grounds, right? If you leave it open tomorrow, parliament or
[Guest]: the judiciary could impose 10 other limitations. So it's the codification exercises, neither
[Guest]: increasing nor decreasing state power. It's just explaining to you what free speech is.
[Guest]: And so their point is, look, free speech is meaningless if you just don't provide any
[Guest]: limitation or contours or boundaries or understanding of it. And if you have those that are established
[Guest]: and if we can agree on them, let's just do them now. Because actually, otherwise you
[Guest]: leave it to 50 years of litigation. And one of the things that they do, right, is they
[Guest]: on this issue, they engage hugely with American law at the time. And they said, look, if you
[Guest]: see American cases over the last 50 years, over the last 20 years, 30 years, they have
[Guest]: constantly changed their minds. And if you can't trust a judiciary that has so much experience
[Guest]: in common law reasoning, what are you going to trust ours? And so there's this fear of
[Guest]: uncertainty and the sense is that, look, let's just put it in. And the idea actually, Amit,
[Guest]: that look, the fact that there are limitations can also strengthen the right. It just turns
[Guest]: on application is not some fanciful idea just by me. So a few years ago, one of the most
[Guest]: important and one of the rare decisions of the Indian Supreme Court that really upheld
[Guest]: free speech was a decision about section 66A of the Information Technology Act, which you
[Guest]: might be familiar with, which had very wide provisions relating to, you know, WhatsAppping,
[Guest]: email communication, so on and so forth. And there were issues about its constitutionality
[Guest]: and it was struck down. And in the judgment, Justice Rohit Nariman gave an outstanding
[Guest]: judgment where basically what he said is he said, look, if this law is valid, it has to
[Guest]: be valid under these specific limitations. There's no other limitation. So that's an
[Guest]: example where having limitations also limits the grounds on which you can limit.
[Amit Varma]: I think it's a very clever and cogent argument that by listing out the limitations, you are
[Amit Varma]: actually putting a limit on the limitations and therefore you're increasing freedom and
[Guest]: not decreasing it. I mean, what I want to say is that you're neither increasing nor
[Guest]: decreasing. For them, they are saying, look, to guarantee a right without telling you what
[Amit Varma]: the right is, is to guarantee nothing. Yeah, but you know, I find that a bit tenuous
[Amit Varma]: because just looking at the restrictions include things like public order, morality and decency
[Amit Varma]: and all of those which are open to interpretation and will inevitably therefore be interpreted
[Amit Varma]: by the state and by the judiciary, which it seems is now captured by the state. And the
[Amit Varma]: second implication of, say, not having something that is as absolute in the support of free
[Amit Varma]: speech as, say, the US First Amendment, is that we still have various laws from the Indian
[Amit Varma]: Penal Code on our book, like 295A, 153A and indeed the sedition law, which is being massively
[Amit Varma]: misused by this current administration and children and entire villages are being booked
[Amit Varma]: under sedition, which really should not exist. But I presume they exist because the Constitution
[Guest]: allows these limitations. So firstly, I completely share your horror at the application of free
[Guest]: speech in India, right? I think it's a mistake to say that that's because the Constitution
[Guest]: allows it. I think that the Constitution actually doesn't allow it. I think it's pure, it's
[Guest]: very poorly applied. I think it's misapplied. And I think that there's very little that
[Amit Varma]: the Constitution can do about that. It's very, these restrictions, you will agree with me
[Amit Varma]: surely are very vaguely worded in terms of public order, decency and morality. These
[Guest]: are open to interpretation. I mean, they are open to interpretation, but because something
[Guest]: is open to interpretation doesn't mean that it's interpreted correctly. Right? And that
[Amit Varma]: itself is open to interpretation. We can go round in circles. No, we can. But then the
[Guest]: idea is that the rules should be so specific that... But I don't think any rule can be
[Guest]: so specific. I mean, at the ultimate analysis, all of constitutional law and indeed all of
[Guest]: law is forged in practice. Right? Or I mean, if you could frame things with complete clarity,
[Guest]: you would not have problems of interpretation in anything. In the books you read, in the
[Guest]: music you hear, in the movies you watch, people disagree on what something means all the time.
[Guest]: But you have canons of interpretation. And you're absolutely right that these exceptions
[Guest]: have given the state much more presumptive power than any of us would like. I don't think
[Guest]: that that was the constitutional vision. I think that what's happened is that you've
[Guest]: actually had exceptions and you've interpreted them in a way to swallow up the right. And
[Guest]: so I'm not at all on board with that. But I think that it's a mistake to conflate general
[Guest]: rules and rules by definition have to be general with how they are applied. Right? And I think
[Guest]: that we should also be very reluctant to actually criticize the Constitution for current moments
[Guest]: in Indian politics, as well as to praise it. Ultimately, constitutional success or failure
[Guest]: rests on a certain kind of political consensus external to the Constitution. If you have
[Guest]: a political and judicial consensus that doesn't want to recognize free speech, no provision
[Guest]: is going to be able to save you. And so the thing is that the Constitution is providing
[Guest]: what? It's like almost you have a fridge that is providing you some mechanism on how to
[Guest]: cool food. If you don't want to plug the fridge in, it's not the fridge's fault. Right? And
[Guest]: so at the founding, you actually have a document that they put in place to create a certain
[Guest]: kind of citizen. And you have a political consensus on interpreting that document in
[Guest]: a certain way and taking that document seriously. Right? If either of those go, you're not going
[Guest]: to get that citizen. Right? I mean, part of what you see in India today is a certain manipulation
[Guest]: of the Constitution, but also a certain attempt in some quarters to disregard it altogether.
[Guest]: Extra constitutional violence, right? Extra constitutional actions. And so that's not
[Guest]: even to take it seriously. Now, in that the Constitution can only do so much, right? You're
[Guest]: going to have to have that kind of the political elite and the judicial elite have to buy into
[Guest]: the document.
[Amit Varma]: So, I recorded with Kapil Komireddy last week, and we were talking about his book Malevolent
[Amit Varma]: Republic. And we spoke about your book a bit and it was exactly on sort of this point where
[Amit Varma]: he argued that the conception is not flawed, but the execution is. And my argument was
[Amit Varma]: that the execution is flawed because the conception is. It is because of these vaguely worded
[Amit Varma]: restrictions that the application of the law can be so open and so can go in all these
[Amit Varma]: different directions. And for what it's worth, this is not a criticism I'm making with regard
[Amit Varma]: to current events. I have written columns 15 years ago, we're arguing about these exact
[Amit Varma]: same laws and the Congress has misused them as much. And if you look at the US First Amendment,
[Amit Varma]: they don't have these caveats and therefore they don't have such blatant misuses of, you
[Guest]: know, free speech laws.
[Guest]: But they have plenty of caveats that have been introduced by the judiciary. They don't
[Guest]: have free speech laws because the judiciary is not allowed them. Ours has. Why is sedition
[Guest]: not been struck down? Why is criminal defamation been upheld?
[Amit Varma]: Why?
[Guest]: Because the judiciary has a very different interpretation of free speech. I mean, all
[Guest]: of those laws have no place either under the Constitution. If you say that the exception
[Guest]: means more than the right, what can I say to you?
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, fair enough. Let's kind of move on. I mean, your chapter on codification after
[Amit Varma]: giving you know, this absolutely fascinating laying out this fascinating debate about should
[Amit Varma]: we have a thick constitution or a thin one and you've even quoted Nehru, you know, talking
[Amit Varma]: in detail about why we don't need a thick constitution and blah, blah, blah. And then
[Amit Varma]: Ambedkar very eloquently pointing out, and I'll quote him on this quote, constitutional
[Amit Varma]: morality is not a natural sentiment. It has to be cultivated. We must realize that our
[Amit Varma]: people have yet to learn it. Democracy in India is only a top dressing on an Indian
[Amit Varma]: soil, which is essentially undemocratic. Stop code and we can make of that what we will.
[Amit Varma]: So you have sort of three sort of illustrations of this codification in this chapter. And
[Amit Varma]: the second one is what we just kind of spoke about where rights and their caveats, which
[Amit Varma]: were hotly debated, because many felt like Somnath Lahiri and other legislators that
[Amit Varma]: there should be no caveats. Otherwise, what is the point? And I must say, I tend to agree
[Amit Varma]: with that. But I understand the reasoning behind it. It's extremely cogent, and it's
[Amit Varma]: just a statist instinct somehow rationalizing itself. Another example you gave is of the
[Amit Varma]: directive principles. Tell me a bit about you know, those specific debates that you've
[Amit Varma]: got those directive principles in the constitution, they are not enforceable. So it is almost
[Amit Varma]: like a lecture that they have virtue signaling earlier, but if they're not enforceable, why
[Guest]: are they there at all? So this was one view, right? And so there have been two puzzles
[Guest]: about the directive principles. One puzzle has been exactly the one you said that look,
[Guest]: if they are not enforceable, what are they doing there? And the second puzzle is the
[Guest]: puzzle that look earlier they used to be enforceable in previous documents. Why was that a switch?
[Guest]: I think that there's an answer to both things. Let's begin with the second question first,
[Guest]: which is I don't think there was a switch. That's the first thing I want to say. And
[Guest]: I think that this is one issue on which Nija Jayal and I have a disagreement. And so one
[Guest]: of the things that she mentioned in her extraordinary book is how Ambedkar actually shifted his
[Guest]: view from a memorandum to a subsequent speech. I spent some time discussing Ambedkar and
[Guest]: I don't think he switched his view. So I actually think that the view was consistent all along.
[Guest]: And the view was that any legitimate state needs to be committed to both civil liberties
[Guest]: and it needs to be committed to social and economic welfare. That never changed previously
[Guest]: and it didn't change later. Now the question is, why are they there if they cannot be enforced?
[Guest]: And I think there are two, three things going on here. I think the first is the sense that
[Guest]: look, judicial enforcement is actually a question of specific institutional design, right? Whether
[Guest]: or not something is judicially enforced is not necessarily signifying its importance.
[Guest]: It is actually signifying something else, that this is something that is fit for determination
[Guest]: by the judiciary and it is a matter of law enforcement, right? Because the legislature
[Guest]: makes laws, executive applies laws, judicially enforces laws, right? Now, part of what's
[Guest]: happening in that moment is that countries are only recognizing civil political rights
[Guest]: and some are not even, like the Soviet Union, right? What the director principles do is
[Guest]: the combination of civil political rights and socioeconomic goals, the fundamental rights
[Guest]: and the director principles means that the constitution is providing both the means by
[Guest]: which change can occur, which is through civil liberties, and it's also providing the ends,
[Guest]: right? Which is a certain amount of economic and social welfare. And the reason they exist
[Guest]: is that they say, look, in India, because there's no knowledge and understanding, those
[Guest]: ends might not be clear. You might actually not know that that's the job of government.
[Guest]: And then Ambedkar asks, what will the security be? And he answers by saying, look, the security
[Guest]: will be that people will vote each other out, right? Because that's what it means to be
[Guest]: a democracy. But at least I need to tell people this is what they should be voting on.
[Amit Varma]: So even if there's no judicial enforcement, there is electoral enforcement.
[Guest]: Of course, and the point is also to give you a sense of why the civil political liberties
[Guest]: thing is important as means is, you know, for years, people have gone on and on about
[Guest]: how socioeconomic rights should be enforced. And now the Indian Supreme Court has often
[Guest]: done it. Look at where that's gotten you. A tangible example that captures things is
[Guest]: the Aadhaar judgment. In the Aadhaar judgment, the court is remarkably unconcerned with civil
[Guest]: political rights on the promise of social and economic welfare, on the development needs
[Guest]: of India. This is Soviet Union 2.0 in terms of logic, right? And so actually, the enforcement
[Guest]: of that has got you in a place where the means no longer matter. And so the bifurcation was
[Guest]: rested on something very significant. It rested on the point that, look, these are certain
[Guest]: things that are fit for this kind of person. These are certain things that are fit for
[Guest]: another kind of person. It doesn't mean that one is more important than the other. A country
[Guest]: may need podcasts and it may need television channels. Doesn't mean that if I don't put
[Guest]: Amit on TV, I don't think podcasts are important, right? I don't think TV is important. People
[Guest]: might be suited to very specific things. Institutions are suited to specific things and each have
[Amit Varma]: their own logic for enforcement and accountability. So if I may sort of frame it this way, you
[Amit Varma]: have negative rights and positive rights, right? Negative rights come from the whole
[Amit Varma]: Lockean notion of what people may not do to you. They may not kill you. They may not shut
[Amit Varma]: you up. So the right to life, the right to free speech, all of those are negative rights
[Amit Varma]: and all of those are embodied in the fundamental rights, which are judicially enforceable.
[Amit Varma]: So through that, the state is essentially committing to protecting each individual citizen.
[Amit Varma]: And positive rights are, I wouldn't even call them rights, I'd call them entitlements, but
[Amit Varma]: whatever language you use, positive rights are things like the right to education, the
[Amit Varma]: right to food. And you can only essentially fulfill those rights with a certain amount
[Amit Varma]: of state coercion, because you need resources to get those, you are infringing negative
[Amit Varma]: rights somewhere or the other to enforce those. And the decision that the framers therefore
[Amit Varma]: took was that let's put all the negative rights in the fundamental rights, so people are assured
[Amit Varma]: that the state will protect them. But there's no point putting the positive rights there
[Amit Varma]: because society hasn't evolved enough. And let's put them in the directive principles
[Amit Varma]: so they are clearly stated and enunciated, but we can't make them enforceable. And if
[Amit Varma]: they are enforceable, it should never be at the cost of the fundamental rights. Is that
[Guest]: a correct summation? In a way, I mean, I wouldn't exactly frame it like this. Because I think
[Guest]: that there's been a lot of excellent literature in the last two decades, about how this negative
[Guest]: positive distinction doesn't fully work. Right? Because at the end of the day, even to support
[Guest]: negative rights, the state needs to do a lot of positive work. I think the way to think
[Guest]: about it would be civil political versus socioeconomic. And I think understanding that in the case
[Guest]: of civil political, we actually refer to individualized remedies, we refer to applications relating
[Guest]: to a particular specific act, a particular instance, a particular person, a particular
[Guest]: group of people. In the case of social and economic welfare, we are often framing policy
[Guest]: questions of a very different kind. But it's more the distinction between civil political
[Guest]: and socioeconomic than negative positive, because the negative positive just becomes
[Guest]: tricky, right? Because even if I have to protect, say, the right to free speech, or from arbitrary
[Guest]: arrest, I still need to have a judicial system to guarantee that I need to have a law enforcement,
[Guest]: I mean, I still had to do a lot of positive work, nothing is guaranteed by itself.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, that's understood. That is the liberal paradox that for your rights to be protected,
[Guest]: you're giving away a certain portion of your rights, but no more. Yeah, that's, that's
[Guest]: Yeah, but that's why I just I think the negative positive is not fully revealed.
[Amit Varma]: So civil political versus socioeconomic. Let's kind of move on to the third element of your
[Amit Varma]: codification chapter, which is the debate between procedural and substantive due process.
[Amit Varma]: What are these?
[Guest]: So you know, it's simple, I hope, which is that procedural due process is basically a
[Guest]: situation where your right to life or personal liberty can be taken away, so long as you
[Guest]: follow the procedure in the law. It's as simple as that, right? So if the procedure says that,
[Guest]: look, person has to be arrested, has to be given a lawyer has to be told, as long as
[Guest]: you've done all that, it's fine. Now, obviously, if that is what you're guaranteeing, then
[Guest]: that is a check on the executive, right? Because the executive has to follow the law. But Parliament
[Guest]: has a lot of freedom in framing the law. A second is substantive due process, where you're
[Guest]: saying, look, not only do you actually have to, not only does the executive has to follow
[Guest]: the law created by Parliament, the law created by Parliament itself has to have certain amounts
[Guest]: of fairness, rule of law type considerations, right? So that itself actually has to have
[Guest]: certain inbuilt requirements. Now, again, in this situation, the debate about how to
[Guest]: codify this provision, how to actually give it textual character, was not a debate over
[Guest]: whether you want the state to have more or less power. Like in the case of rights, like
[Guest]: in the case of directive principles, one of the themes I've tried to run throughout successfully
[Guest]: unsuccessfully, is that these were all debates actually about how you should write something.
[Guest]: These were not varying visions, right? Nobody who argued for restrictions on free speech
[Guest]: in the Constitution had a less generous view of free speech. That's the interesting thing,
[Guest]: right? So then you could ask, what were they thinking? Maybe they were wrong to think that.
[Guest]: But at the end of the day, they all are thinking that that is itself what makes free speech
[Guest]: possible. They are thinking that, look, actually, you put in no restrictions tomorrow, other
[Guest]: bodies who we don't trust could impose 10 more restrictions. Now, the puzzle here is
[Guest]: that if you recognize substantive due process, which means that you give the legislature
[Guest]: very little power or less power, then because you're also going to judge the laws that they
[Guest]: create, then you could prevent very radical economic legislation, like property redistribution,
[Guest]: because there could be debates about on what test will you judge that law. On the other
[Guest]: hand, if you actually only allow procedural due process, you will give the legislature
[Guest]: very large powers. And the danger with that is that you will allow preventive detention.
[Guest]: Now, the interesting thing about this debate, Amit, is neither side wants extreme preventive
[Guest]: detention, neither side wants to limit economic redistribution. But the question is, which
[Guest]: textual provision will give you what? So it again captures the neutrality of the harmony
[Guest]: between both sides. And ultimately, what you get is you resolve the issue by doing procedural
[Guest]: due process, but by actually having a separate set of provisions in the Constitution, Article
[Guest]: 22, that provide certain safeguards in cases of preventive detention. Like you need to
[Guest]: have a lawyer, you need to be told all things like that, double jeopardy, those kinds of
[Amit Varma]: things. So in a sense, these guys are not just debating what the Constitution should
[Amit Varma]: do. It's not so much a debate over ends per se, but they're also debating how the Constitution
[Amit Varma]: should achieve that, how it should be written. So it's at this meta level, where they're
[Guest]: having to think about this completely. I mean, these are a group of people who are basically
[Guest]: saying, look, after us, in a year, the whole country will be governed through popular authorization.
[Guest]: What will that do to people? How will they behave? And what document do they need to
[Guest]: actually understand how to behave? I can't limit them. They could change the Constitution
[Guest]: or they could burn it. But assume that they want to take it seriously. What guidance can
[Guest]: I provide to them? If they say, yeah, people have told us, protect free speech. I don't
[Guest]: even know what free speech is. If people will say protect due process, I don't even know
[Guest]: what these things mean. So the Constitution in that sense, this is a phrase I use later
[Guest]: in the book, is in most countries in the West, it's a rule book. In India, it's also a textbook.
[Guest]: The whole idea is that you're actually explaining these concepts, because they are not understood
[Guest]: by anyone.
[Amit Varma]: No, and it's interesting that it's often being joked, like what you point out is that because
[Amit Varma]: we are a democracy, the facility to change the Constitution is, you know, freely available
[Amit Varma]: to elected politicians. And this has been freely used. Like, at one point, it was joked
[Amit Varma]: that the Constitution is not a book, but a periodical. And Nehru changed it very often,
[Amit Varma]: Indira, of course, famously. And, you know, you spoke of burning, Ambedkar said, I think,
[Amit Varma]: in 53 or 54, that if I had my way, I would just have burned the Constitution. As an aside,
[Amit Varma]: before we go to a commercial break, what made him so frustrated?
[Guest]: I mean, I think those are very specific debates about sort of Hindu reform, about the nature
[Guest]: in which change is occurring in an independent India. So that, I mean, one of the things
[Guest]: Amit, I consciously try to do is make sure that I don't spend too much time post 1950.
[Guest]: A, because then those dynamics become very different. And B, also, then I suffer the
[Guest]: problem of having to update my book, which I don't want to do, because I'm kind of lazy.
[Amit Varma]: So this is great. So I end at 1950.
[Amit Varma]: Excellent. And we'll take a quick commercial break. And after we come back, the meat of
[Amit Varma]: the book is still left. So we shall talk about that.
[Amit Varma]: Like me, are you someone who loves fine art, but can't really afford to have paintings
[Amit Varma]: by the artists you like hanging on your walls? Well, worry no more. Head on over to IndianColors.com.
[Amit Varma]: Indian Colors is a company that licenses images of the finest modern art from some of the
[Amit Varma]: best artists in India and adapts them into products of everyday use. These include wearable
[Amit Varma]: art like stoles and dresses for women and evening shirts for men, home decor like wall
[Amit Varma]: plates, cushion covers and table linen, and accessories like tote bags and pencil pouches.
[Amit Varma]: This allows art lovers to actually get fine art into their homes at an accessible price.
[Amit Varma]: And artists get royalties on sales, just like authors do. Their artists include luminaries
[Amit Varma]: like Dhruvi Acharya, Jaideep Mehrotra, Madhuri Kathe, Sameer Mondal, Brinda Miller, Tanmay
[Amit Varma]: Samanta, TM Aziz and Manisha Gehra Baswani. They accept bulk orders for corporate and
[Amit Varma]: festival gifting. But even if you want to buy just for yourself or a friend, head on
[Amit Varma]: over to IndianColors.com. That's colors with an O-U. And if you want a 15% discount, apply
[Amit Varma]: the code unseen. U-N-S-E-E-N. That's unseen for 15% off at IndianColors.com.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to the scene in the unseen. I'm chatting with Madhav Khosla on his amazing
[Amit Varma]: book India's founding moment, which is essentially divided into three themes where he looks at
[Amit Varma]: these three sort of locations of debate at the time the constitution was being formed.
[Amit Varma]: One, as we have discussed, is the codification, both in the sense of the extreme amount of
[Amit Varma]: codification that the book had, and also, you know, illustrating that through how they
[Amit Varma]: looked at directive principles, how they looked at the rights, which they did guarantee, but
[Amit Varma]: attach caveats to, and in the whole question of procedural versus substantive due process.
[Amit Varma]: Now we come to sort of your second chapter of your book, which is about how we chose
[Amit Varma]: such a centralized model. Now, I'd done an episode with the historian Gyan Prakash on
[Amit Varma]: his book on the emergency. And he pointed out during that episode and indeed in his
[Amit Varma]: book, that one of the reasons that so much power was centralized, which is why everything
[Amit Varma]: Indira Gandhi did was absolutely alleged by the constitution. One of the reasons so much
[Amit Varma]: power was centralized was that the framers of our constitution at the time they were
[Amit Varma]: framing the constitution, there was violence breaking out all over the country, there was
[Amit Varma]: no guarantee that the center would hold. So hey, the centralized power for that reason,
[Amit Varma]: but as you point out in your book, debates around that had been going on for decades,
[Amit Varma]: you know, and Gandhi was, of course, one of the prominent voices against centralization.
[Amit Varma]: So were people like Radhakamal Mukherjee, who wrote the book, democracies of the East,
[Amit Varma]: which which I found fascinating, and I hadn't heard of it before. So, and you've quoted
[Amit Varma]: elaborately from that. So give me a sense of, you know, through the decades before independence
[Amit Varma]: is even a remote possibility. How are people thinking of this relationship between state
[Guest]: and society?
[Guest]: So, Amit, you know, I began thinking about this chapter with the preconception that I
[Guest]: think a lot of people have, one that you just gestured at, which was that look, partition
[Guest]: happened, there's civil war, and a strong centralized state is what can prevent India
[Guest]: from breaking up into smaller states. It can prevent further partition, it can prevent
[Guest]: the balkanization of the new country. And so I thought that look, a centralized state
[Guest]: is basically a contingent outcome of a serious security concern and of fear. And then the
[Guest]: more you read the debates, you realize that's not actually true. So there's a you realize
[Guest]: that there's a deep ideological and theoretical vision behind centralization. And we need
[Guest]: to think a little bit about what that vision was, right. Now, the Constituent Assembly
[Guest]: meets under the 1946 Cabinet Mission Plan, right? And the Cabinet Mission Plan is a failure.
[Guest]: Under the Cabinet Mission Plan, there is not that much centralization, right? It's a federation
[Guest]: of a complex kind. And once the Cabinet Mission Plan fails, when India becomes divided, because
[Guest]: under the Cabinet Mission Plan, it was one united country. Basically, people in the Constituent
[Guest]: Assembly are thrilled, because they're like, look, now we have freedom, we can make any
[Guest]: country we want, we are not governed by the provisions of the plan. And then you see a
[Guest]: debate about centralization. And there are two broad traditions. And I think the best
[Guest]: way to understand the centralization debate is to see it as a contrast between the state
[Guest]: and society. So on the one hand, you have people like Gandhi, like Radha Kamal Mukherjee,
[Guest]: who want something called political pluralism. And let's pause for a moment, because it's
[Guest]: quite a complicated idea. In our societies, the state is at the center of authority, the
[Guest]: state is the exclusive authority. A society that has political pluralism is one where
[Guest]: a range of bodies in society exercise authority, professional guilds, associations, organizations,
[Guest]: and the state is one among them, there's nothing special about the state. And what was interesting
[Guest]: in Mukherjee and Gandhi's vision, is that you would have these extremely decentralized
[Guest]: village republics, where there would be authority split everywhere. And so its authority is
[Guest]: more and more dispersed, think about it as a dispersal of power through and through.
[Guest]: And that in a way would provide some kind of freedom. So it is a vision of democracy,
[Guest]: make no mistake about it. It's a vision of democracy, that places a huge amount of emphasis
[Guest]: on participation, and on local attention, and on local engagement, right. And it is
[Guest]: a vision of democracy, where there is a critique of the modernized, civilized, Western conception
[Guest]: of progress, because that is associated with a certain kind of violence. Now on the alternative
[Guest]: side of the spectrum, you also have a vision of democracy. There the vision of democracy
[Guest]: comes from the idea that look, everybody in India sees each other differently. They see
[Guest]: each other through narrow, localized, and localism is the enemy of equality. Because
[Guest]: ultimately, if I see you as belonging to X village, Y caste, C religion, speaking A language,
[Guest]: B dialect, I'm not seeing you as a human being, I'm not seeing you as an individual. And the
[Guest]: way to actually make me see you as an individual is to dismantle those prior forms of authority,
[Guest]: and to actually place us all under one umbrella. And that one umbrella is the state. So the
[Guest]: minute we all get under one umbrella, we actually come under the state. So that's the two very
[Guest]: different visions of democracy. And they rest on two very different visions of the society
[Guest]: and the state. On the one hand, society can be the site of change. And society can be
[Guest]: the site of freedom. And the state is a violent force, right, that just coerces people. On
[Guest]: the other hand, society is what needs to be destroyed, quite literally. And actually,
[Guest]: the state is the force that can enable us to see each other differently. Now, the question
[Guest]: that you can ask is, look, why is it that the Pluralists lost out? And the Pluralists
[Guest]: lost out for the same reason that they lost out everywhere. And by everywhere, I mean
[Guest]: that this was part of a big global movement, also in the UK, most famously, but also elsewhere.
[Guest]: And the Pluralists lost out everywhere. And by lost out, what do I mean? I mean that look,
[Guest]: one of the important, noteworthy, startling features of the mid 20th century is that for
[Guest]: 50 years before that, you have a range of proposals, right, to move beyond the nation
[Guest]: state, right, all kinds of federations, you have a range of proposals for certain kinds
[Guest]: of Pluralism. But ultimately, what happens is that the 20th century marks the centrality
[Guest]: of the nation state and its victory over other institutional forms. And the Pluralists lose
[Guest]: out because they never have an argument for actually how you can, through the logic of
[Guest]: society without a state, preserve peace and enable a certain kind of freedom. So when
[Guest]: somebody will say that, look, how can you actually ensure that Hindus and Muslims will
[Guest]: not fight? The Pluralist answer will be, look, be good to your neighbours. They've not fought
[Guest]: before. If they fought before, then they find a way to deal with it. It has happened for
[Guest]: so many years, it will happen for more years. By happen, I mean the resolution, right? That
[Guest]: is not good enough as an answer to people who have such a deep fear of that situation
[Guest]: because they say, look, you actually need a force, a genuine force to attack and to
[Guest]: respond to society. You cannot just say society will find a way because it has found a way
[Guest]: all the time before. So the difference is that the reason for the failure is that they
[Guest]: cannot offer a conceptual answer for the reasons for which the state had been imagined in the
[Guest]: first place. Their answer is a kind of sociology, or it's a kind of history, right? Where they
[Guest]: say, look, it's happened before, people have been fighting for long, they find a way to
[Guest]: deal with it. Whereas if I'm terrified that two people are going to kill each other, I
[Guest]: want an answer to why they wouldn't do it. And the answer why they wouldn't do it is
[Guest]: because one of them would be jailed. And so that answer is the state.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, this reminds me of what my great liberal hero, Frederick Hayek, once wrote
[Amit Varma]: in an essay called why I am not a conservative, where he pointed out that, you know, conservatives
[Amit Varma]: will always have things to say about the means of change, but they will not have, they will
[Amit Varma]: not be able to explain how change will happen in the first place. They will have no specific
[Amit Varma]: ends of their own, which is something I explored in an episode also with Jyothi Thrao on his
[Amit Varma]: recent book, The Indian Conservative, which reminded me of this argument against the pluralist
[Amit Varma]: that, you know, how will you make change happen? My sort of question here is, I totally get
[Amit Varma]: the logic against localism, that when you have divisive, dangerous, unpredictable localism,
[Amit Varma]: the urge for centralization and to bring it under one set of values is very coherent to
[Amit Varma]: me. But what I would argue for and what, you know, in India has sometimes been paid lip
[Amit Varma]: service to is that you centralize your values through the rules of the constitution or the
[Amit Varma]: textbook, the constitution, you centralize your values, but you decentralize governance,
[Amit Varma]: where governance becomes as local as possible all the way down to cities and towns in Panchayati
[Amit Varma]: Raj. And what that does is that it creates a link between power and accountability, which
[Amit Varma]: doesn't exist today because our system is so dysfunctional. It increases the value of
[Amit Varma]: a vote because you will actually feel assured that your vote is far likelier to make a difference
[Amit Varma]: at that level. And therefore, citizens become more concerned and educate themselves better,
[Amit Varma]: their incentives get better. And that's the sort of, so when I talk about the desirability
[Amit Varma]: of a decentralized state, that's what I mean. And you have your values centralized in the
[Amit Varma]: constitution and the laws that govern you, but you have your governance decentralized,
[Guest]: so democracy can be more efficient.
[Guest]: No, I certainly think that India has, I mean, one of the many ills in India's constitution
[Guest]: model today is the kind of centralization, right? I think the important thing to think
[Guest]: about is at that moment, the fear of decentralization, even of the kinds that you describe, right,
[Guest]: or of like, you could, I mean, there are ways to think that centralize on some things, decentralize
[Guest]: on others, so on and so forth. And this is just what's interesting to learn, right, is
[Guest]: that the fear of society is so deep that there's a sense that, look, the more you go down,
[Guest]: the more society will permeate the state, right? And actually, therefore, radicalism
[Guest]: requires some distance, which is why people who are critical of this are saying, look,
[Guest]: we're doing imperialism 2.0, because the whole point that radicalism requires distance was
[Guest]: the colonial argument. So, it's a very interesting contest between both sides. And I think it's
[Guest]: also worth noting, because you referenced the word conservative a moment ago, depending
[Guest]: on where you stand, people like Gandhi and Mukherjee are either conservative or radical,
[Guest]: because at one level, they are radical, because they are saying, look, Indian society itself
[Guest]: can do it. You don't even need the state. That's also radical. Gandhi had a profoundly
[Guest]: radical view of human agency. Not only did he believe that people were capable of what
[Guest]: we might think are extraordinary things, he thought every person is capable of that. So,
[Guest]: I think what's important in the contest between people like Ambedkar, Nehru versus a Gandhi-Mukherjee
[Guest]: type thing is both sides claim radicalism, and both sides claim democracy. I think what
[Amit Varma]: Gandhi and Mukherjee do, and tell me if you agree, is that their ends are radical, but
[Guest]: their means are conservative. No, they would say that their ends are deep, their means
[Guest]: are deeply radical, because they say that it can happen through society itself. That's
[Amit Varma]: a conservative statement that you don't need the coercive power of the state that society
[Amit Varma]: will reform itself where required. That's exactly the classic conservative position,
[Guest]: isn't it? That's what Burke would say. No, because they would say that, look, it's so
[Guest]: much more radical that the change lies within, that I can actually change within. That's
[Guest]: radical. It's conservative to think that some external force will do it. Their whole metaphor
[Guest]: of the state is an external force. They see the state simply like colonialism, just as
[Guest]: an external force. If somebody were to tell you, Amit, there are ABC things you can change,
[Guest]: and either change them by talking to these people, or change them within just on your
[Guest]: own. You would say that changing them on my own is like too radical. Like, it's like that
[Guest]: requires too much almost. Like there's a different level of evolution needed for that kind of
[Amit Varma]: and that's their answer. I think I'd interpret these terms slightly differently, but moving
[Guest]: on. Yeah, I mean, I would just say that both sides claim radicalism, and both sides claim
[Guest]: democracy. I think that's what I would say. I'm not saying you have to agree or disagree,
[Guest]: right? The very fact that there are multiple definitions of these terms is why they can
[Amit Varma]: both claim it. Fair enough. You also cite, you know, it's very interesting that, you
[Amit Varma]: know, Lasky was a big influence on Nehru and a hero of Nehru, and yet Lasky has a different
[Amit Varma]: view on this subject than Nehru does. And from your book, you write, I'll quote from
[Amit Varma]: that, quote for Lasky, the emphasis on state coercion had been a philosophical and sociological
[Amit Varma]: error. It had presented a model of power that failed to pay due attention to the reality
[Amit Varma]: of consent. And later on, you quote P.T. Chacko saying during the debates, quote, in the place
[Amit Varma]: of foreign imperialism, we are now having an Indian imperialism, stop quote. And many
[Amit Varma]: would say looking at, for example, what is happening in Kashmir now, you know, many would
[Amit Varma]: turn to Lasky's point about the consent of the government and the way the central government
[Amit Varma]: could just declare Kashmir a non-state and split it up into union territories. Doesn't
[Amit Varma]: that show that there was something profound in the warnings of those who warned against
[Guest]: such a powerful centralized state?
[Guest]: So two things. One, just as a specific point of intellectual history, you're right that
[Guest]: as site Lasky is a pluralist, Lasky changes his view later. Right. And so he then becomes
[Guest]: a state guy. And that's the best sort of book that explains the Lasky and switch. And it's
[Guest]: the best among the best books on pluralism is a book by David Runciman, which I reference.
[Guest]: The second is that I think the short answer that a lot of people would give you is yes,
[Guest]: you're right. I mean, I think the state seems to be exercising extraordinary coercive power
[Guest]: significantly more than what any of us associated with modern constitutional democracies. Now,
[Guest]: how that has happened and how that will change is a question probably above one's pay grade.
[Guest]: But I think that it's certainly true that more and more, the state is behaving less
[Guest]: and less like the state in a free society.
[Amit Varma]: And I just want to clarify for my listeners that my sort of what you have described beautifully
[Amit Varma]: here is the arguments that led to the centralization of the state. Nowhere have you actually defended
[Amit Varma]: it or argued for it. In fact, you've been pretty scrupulous in giving both sides of
[Amit Varma]: the debate and talking about, you know, how we sort of got here. Let's talk about the
[Amit Varma]: third locus of your book, which is very complicated and which also is like a two part question.
[Amit Varma]: And that's a question of identity. India, at its founding, does have the huge Hindu
[Amit Varma]: Muslim problem to deal with. And you've quoted from, you know, Jinnah's presidential address
[Amit Varma]: at the All India Muslim League conference in 1940, where he explains in great detail
[Amit Varma]: why Hindus and Muslims are two separate nations and they cannot possibly live together. You've
[Amit Varma]: quoted Nehru expressing his contempt for group based thinking. And at the same time, you've
[Amit Varma]: also cited from Ambedkar's book, Pakistan or the partition of India, where he points
[Amit Varma]: out that the argument behind Pakistan has some merit to it and, you know, should not
[Amit Varma]: be caricatured. And also at one point he talks about, which I found very interesting in the
[Amit Varma]: present context, where he talks about why Hindu nationalists and the Indian National
[Amit Varma]: Congress have both failed in dealing with the problem. Because as he says it, the Hindu
[Amit Varma]: nationalists want to just do away with Muslims and the Indian National Congress wants to
[Amit Varma]: appease them and pander to them. And that doesn't help either. Can you elaborate a bit
[Amit Varma]: on the sort of pre-independence debates that were happening around this question?
[Guest]: Completely. So the interesting thing about the years prior to the birth of modern India
[Guest]: is that there is a deep crisis of liberal representation, by which I mean that you are
[Guest]: not seeing people as individuals. You are seeing them as members of groups and you are
[Guest]: seeing citizenship as mediated through group identity. So if you see Muslim nationalists,
[Guest]: Jinnah is the most famous example. But I also think that somebody like Moulana Azad is very
[Guest]: interesting. And I think the problem that's happened is this, Amit, that all of our historical
[Guest]: attention is on partition, which is a question of territoriality. Did you want one country
[Guest]: or two? If you change the focus and say, I'm not interested in the question of do you want
[Guest]: one country or two, but I'm interested in the question actually of do you see people
[Guest]: as equal or as different? The question of whether you keep them as equal or different
[Guest]: and you could keep them as different in one country or in two, but do you see them as
[Guest]: equal or different, right? If you ask that question, you're no longer interested in territoriality,
[Guest]: but you're interested in representation. And then your interesting date is not 1947. It's
[Guest]: 1909. It's the Mali Minto reforms onwards. From that period to 1947, you barely find
[Guest]: anyone who's seeing people as the same.
[Amit Varma]: And just to clarify what the Mali Minto reforms did was it created separate electorates for
[Amit Varma]: Hindus and Muslims.
[Guest]: So basically, since that period, somebody like Jinnah is seeing them as different and
[Guest]: asking for two countries. Somebody like Moulana Azad is seeing them as actually asking for
[Guest]: one country, but I think it's not clear that he's seeing them as the same. He never really
[Guest]: gives up on Sharia. And I discussed the intellectual origins of how far back this goes. In the
[Guest]: case of, I mean, it goes all the way back to Sayyar Ahmed Khan famously. So in the case
[Guest]: of Hindu nationalism, they see everybody as the same, but everybody's Hindu. So they effectively,
[Guest]: it means an elimination of the minority completely. And the group, which is the Indian National
[Guest]: Congress, which unambiguously wants one country and unambiguously hates communalism in some
[Guest]: sense doesn't give us a very clear model either, because it's not that interested in this question.
[Guest]: But for most of his life, somebody like Nehru at that time, not for most of his life, but
[Guest]: for most of those years, is interested in actually economic issues. And he sees differences
[Guest]: as exemplifying economic conflicts and as being a reflection of economic conflicts.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, in your book, you write about how the Bengal conflict, he saw it not as a conflict
[Amit Varma]: between Hindus and Muslims, but landlords and tenants.
[Guest]: Completely. And you see those examples can be easily multiplied. Similarly, sorry, in
[Guest]: a different way, Gandhi is also somebody who doesn't take the question seriously at the
[Guest]: level of theory because he's interested in practice. Gandhi's answer is, look, you treat
[Guest]: your neighbor well, right? He doesn't have a model of representation because he's aiming
[Guest]: for a very different political vision. Now, that basically means that it's only after
[Guest]: partition that you get a situation where you have to come up with a theory of representation.
[Guest]: And you see two things happening in that moment in Indian history. The first is that you see
[Guest]: a move towards individual representation. So, the assembly rejects separate electorates,
[Guest]: it rejects weightage on religious grounds, it rejects reservations on religious grounds.
[Guest]: Because they say that, look, any model that is structured around identity cannot work.
[Guest]: It cannot create a sustainable political environment. And how do we know that? Because we've tried
[Guest]: it. We have actually been trying since the last 40 years, a model. And if you are involved
[Guest]: in this kind of trap, then what Pratap Bhanu Mehta once called Savarkar's trap, you can
[Guest]: never get a solution out of it. If this is your question, all answers are wrong. Because
[Guest]: if you're a majority, then you can never, if you take the majority view, the minority
[Guest]: will be unhappy. If you take the minority view, the majority will be unhappy. And so
[Guest]: you actually cannot ask the question in that way. The second thing they say is that, look,
[Guest]: even to ask the question in that way is not only politically unsustainable in the way
[Guest]: that we've seen, but it also actually is not a reflection of a democracy. Because the minute
[Guest]: I am looking at people through certain identities, I'm doing that because I'm thinking that,
[Guest]: look, a Muslim has a certain interest, a Hindu has a certain interest. But I only needed
[Guest]: to do that. I only needed to guess people's interests in a British model where people
[Guest]: were not expressing their interest. Now that people can go to the ballot box and vote,
[Guest]: I don't need to identify them in any way. In fact, the only category that matters is
[Guest]: political majority and political minority. And that is a category that is created and
[Guest]: recreated through politics, which goes back to our initial theme. The whole point of a
[Guest]: democracy is that I can make any world. To make any world, I need a majority and I can
[Guest]: make any majority. Even if I'm one person who believes something, a democracy lets me
[Guest]: convince everybody else and then we become a majority and we vote. So the only category
[Guest]: that matters for the purposes of a democratic politics is a political majority and a political
[Guest]: minority. And in order for it to be democratic, that must almost by definition be fluid. That
[Guest]: can always be created and recreated. And so I can then always see people differently.
[Guest]: Now the question that you might ask is, look, if people are so entrenched in seeing people
[Guest]: as Hindus and Muslims, wouldn't they vote like that? And then the political majority
[Guest]: and minority would mirror that. And here, the assembly comes up with getting a very
[Guest]: interesting lesson from partition. Ultimately, what partition told you is that you created
[Guest]: a huge communal problem where none existed. That means you put people in a specific institutional
[Guest]: structure of separate electorates, of weightage, of reservations, all of this stuff, and you
[Guest]: got them to think like that. You put them in a different structure, they won't think
[Amit Varma]: like that. Right. And this is like the point that Sardar Patel, for example, made where
[Amit Varma]: he said that separate electorates had sharpened communal differences because people would
[Amit Varma]: see themselves as Hindus or Muslims and their participation would be along those lines.
[Guest]: Exactly. And this goes back just to the initial theme that we talked about, which is the heart
[Guest]: of the book, that you put people in any institutional structure, you'll get that. And so their point
[Guest]: is you put people in an institutional structure where when you say majority-minority, they
[Guest]: don't think Hindu-Muslim. They think political majority, political minority, and they're
[Amit Varma]: always thinking, how can I change those? So then what the constitution does by removing
[Amit Varma]: separate electorates is that it liberates you politically from having to think of yourself
[Amit Varma]: as a Hindu. You might still feel that we're at the level of a community or society, but
[Guest]: politically you can vote as an individual. Yeah, you can think any way you want. Nobody
[Guest]: can stop you from doing that. But the point is that the relevant political category is
[Amit Varma]: one actually of a political majority and minority. And so the separation of, you know, so you
[Amit Varma]: did not have separate electorates. You just have one electorate and this is the reasoning
[Guest]: behind it. Now, you also don't have reservations on religion and you don't have weightage.
[Guest]: For all those years, it's not only separate electorates, there are a range of proposals
[Guest]: that are being worked out in different ways, and all of them are rejected. And you would
[Amit Varma]: assume that the arguments for rejecting them, for example, that they will increase the differences
[Amit Varma]: between people, they will force people to think in those particular boxes, and so on
[Amit Varma]: and so forth, are arguments that could also be used against caste. Now explain to me why,
[Guest]: you know, that was looked at differently. Before that, Amit, if I could just pause you
[Guest]: for a second, it's not only that it will make people think more like that. It's that that's
[Guest]: not the relevant question for politics. I could make people think all the time like
[Guest]: that or not at all like that. What's relevant in politics is not ethnic majority, it's political
[Guest]: majority. And the minute I make it ethnic majority, I'm not letting myself create any
[Guest]: political majority I want. So it's anti-democratic. Because you're basically saying that I can't
[Guest]: create the identity I want in politics, the relevant identity being political majority,
[Guest]: that identity is already given to me from outside. So that's outside the domain of politics,
[Guest]: then I cannot actually be self ruling. Because to me, to be self ruling, I should be able
[Amit Varma]: to collectively create that identity in politics. Then identity would be destiny. But here it's
[Guest]: not you can make your own destiny. Exactly, exactly. Which is what it means to belong
[Guest]: to the modern world. So as opposed to the ancient or medieval world. Yeah. So let's
[Amit Varma]: do the modern world itself is changing. Yeah, but I mean, modern in a normative sense, not
[Amit Varma]: in a descriptive sense. Yeah, absolutely. Let's talk about caste. You know, what are
[Amit Varma]: the debates around that? And here is treated very differently from religion. And you've
[Amit Varma]: sort of described the whole series of intellectual arguments around caste as well. And at some
[Amit Varma]: level, of course, it mirrors the discussion we had earlier, where Gandhi is saying that,
[Amit Varma]: let it change at the level of society. And Ambedkar is saying, Are you crazy? That's
[Amit Varma]: never going to happen. We need the state to sort of step in. And at the same time, the
[Amit Varma]: same sort of arguments which could be made against religious reservations can be made
[Amit Varma]: against caste reservations, but they're not for a very good reason, which you elucidate.
[Guest]: So tell me a bit about that. So I mean, this is a great question, right? Because the caste
[Guest]: everything I've told you so far about religion, somebody could say, look, Madhav, this is
[Guest]: well and good, but then why give reservations on caste, right? And I think nobody's quite
[Guest]: answered this question. One answer has been look, it's an exception. That doesn't really
[Guest]: explain it. Second is, oh, it's just contradictory, right? So I'm just sort of describing the
[Guest]: conflict. I think that they actually fit together. And they fit together in the following way
[Guest]: that firstly, there is an appreciation of the fact that caste tenders a different problem
[Guest]: to religion. Namely, in religion, the challenge is how can I preserve religious freedom and
[Guest]: allow people to vote on non-religious grounds and not mediate their citizenship through
[Guest]: religion. In the case of caste, the goal is not accommodation, it's annihilation. I actually
[Guest]: want to end caste. That's the first thing to be said. The second is that I actually
[Guest]: think that, I as in the founders think that you could be in a kind of democratic system
[Guest]: of the kind that I've described. But there could be certain kinds of people excluded
[Guest]: from the very process, because the process is not perfect in some way, and their views
[Guest]: therefore don't reach the fore. Now, that is not a majority minority game, necessarily,
[Guest]: right? That is a game about actually a certain amount of discrimination or a certain amount
[Guest]: of backwardness. And there is an attempt at the founding to say, okay, if I actually have
[Guest]: a group like this, how do I identify them? Now, I don't want to identify them as belonging
[Guest]: just to a particular identity. And why don't I want to do that? I don't want to do that
[Guest]: for two reasons. Number one, I need some kind of principle, right? Today, somebody could
[Guest]: suffer from that. Tomorrow, it could be somebody else. What's the logic? Because if I'm doing
[Guest]: it, I need to explain it to the people within the group and outside the group. Second, if
[Guest]: I do it purely on identity, then actually the identity I want to remove will get further
[Guest]: entrenched, right? The identity I want to remove will actually be the identity that
[Guest]: gets recognized, which is why the attempt then becomes to abstract a certain kind of
[Guest]: concept. And the concept that they arrive at is one of backwardness. Now, the reason
[Guest]: why this is linked to individual freedom in just the way that the religion question was
[Guest]: is that in the religion question, the attempt is actually to focus on the individual rather
[Guest]: than mediate the relationship between him or her through the group. Here, the attempt
[Guest]: is to rescue the individual from the chains of a certain group pressure, right? In both
[Guest]: cases, I want to recover the individual. And here the thought is that if I abstract away
[Guest]: and create a category of backwardness, then I could identify people. Now, it so happens
[Guest]: at that time that whatever way you slice it, certain caste groups are backward and they
[Guest]: fit into that. But the identification of the caste group is actually the consequence of
[Guest]: the principle. It's not the object of it, right? You have a principle and then you arrive
[Guest]: at that. And the very fact that there's an emphasis on that leads to Ambedkar saying
[Guest]: many important things. For instance, one of the things he says is that, look, it would
[Guest]: make no sense in the world to have reservations more than 50% for the simple reason that then
[Guest]: the group is not backward. Because backwardness is a relative category. If everybody's backward,
[Amit Varma]: then how can you be backward? This is like the opposite of the Lake Wobegon problem,
[Amit Varma]: which was if Lake Wobegon was this fictional town created by Garrison Wheeler, where everybody
[Guest]: was above average. Right, exactly. And so one of the cases that the Supreme Court is
[Guest]: hearing currently is a case involving 100% reservations. But Ambedkar would be horrified
[Guest]: at this, right? Because the argument is that, look, actually, so the idea was that, look,
[Guest]: I want to annihilate caste. I want to transcend caste. And there are certain amounts of disadvantage
[Guest]: that exist that I may need to tackle in some special way. We have collapsed into a situation
[Guest]: where the link between special treatment and disadvantage has been thrown out of the window.
[Guest]: And instead, I want to actually split power between different caste groups. So the constitution
[Guest]: has now become a power sharing device between castes, rather than actually a way to liberate
[Amit Varma]: caste or liberate the individual from caste. No, and it seems to me that, you know, people
[Amit Varma]: often conflate the question of caste and what reservations have become today. So if you
[Amit Varma]: criticize reservations as they are today, you are immediately assumed to be casteist,
[Amit Varma]: you know, which need not be the case. And I would say that the concept of caste has
[Amit Varma]: also become politicized, to the extent that I can see the rationale of some of the arguments
[Amit Varma]: against religious recognition in the constitution, separate electorates and reservations for
[Amit Varma]: religion and so on, that those fears coming through in the context of caste, where you
[Amit Varma]: are deepening divisions between people of different castes because of the politicization
[Amit Varma]: of it. And therefore, you are not annihilating it if you embed it in the constitution.
[Guest]: Completely, completely. I mean, it's you've now reached a situation where you're trying
[Guest]: to basically have citizens compete with one another rather than hold the state accountable.
[Guest]: That's absolutely correct. And I mean, you're and you're also right that the debate takes
[Guest]: on a certain form, where if you criticize anything about it, even if you criticize 100%
[Guest]: reservations, you're somehow against equality or against the liberation of certain groups
[Guest]: that have been horrifically discriminated against, whereas Ambedkar would have been
[Amit Varma]: tormented at the current caste arrangement. Exactly. Let's kind of move on to a couple
[Amit Varma]: of larger questions that I had. And one is that you've set off in this book very clearly
[Amit Varma]: to be a scrupulous chronicler, you know, you've chronicled it. And perhaps the only quibble
[Amit Varma]: I might have against it, which is a really small quibble and which is possibly a feature
[Amit Varma]: and not a bug, is that there's not enough of your perspective coming through. So is
[Amit Varma]: this a conscious decision that I will not get, you know, my view of the world in this,
[Amit Varma]: I'm telling a story that needs to be told. And if I leave myself out of it is better
[Guest]: that way. No, I actually think there is a lot of my perspective. I think that all narratives
[Guest]: have arguments embedded in them. And I think a lot of my perspective, I gesture at the
[Guest]: very end, right? I don't think that the purpose of the book is so much necessarily to defend
[Guest]: a particular choice. But I think it is to defend the idea that look, this is actually
[Guest]: what democratic citizenship means, right, centered around general rules and the rule
[Guest]: of law, centered around a state that treats people equally, and centered around citizenship
[Guest]: unmediated my identity. So I think that no author can escape his or her perspective,
[Guest]: as much as they might want to distance themselves from it. I think I'm all over the book. But
[Guest]: I think it's also very bad for authors to explain their own work. True. I think the
[Guest]: postmodern thought that the author is dead is a good one.
[Amit Varma]: No, I mean, I meant it in the I mean, obviously, then you have been very crafty about it. And
[Amit Varma]: I meant it in the sense that while reading your chapters on centralization, or, for example,
[Amit Varma]: rights and their caveats, and you summarize the arguments on both sides, so obviously,
[Amit Varma]: faithfully, and with such clarity that I wasn't sure where you stood on these matters.
[Amit Varma]: So, but that just means I've done well, because I've convinced you that it's them, not me.
[Guest]: Ah, okay. Well, they made wrote the Constitution, not you. Yeah. So I think that there's certain,
[Guest]: I think that there is an attempt at some kind of faithful reconstruction. But I think, I
[Guest]: think it's like, I'll give you an example, right? I think in the centralization question,
[Guest]: I think I tried to faithfully reconstruct both sides. But I also try to emphasize why
[Guest]: one side lost. Right? Similarly, in the codification, I tried to capture the impulse, right? So
[Guest]: I think in explaining, I think my perspective comes out in the kind of sympathy I offer
[Guest]: to actually why certain things won at the end.
[Amit Varma]: Fair enough. Now, you know, people often would think of legal studies and legal history and
[Amit Varma]: the history of the Constitution as a very dry subject. And what you're obviously dealing
[Amit Varma]: with is some incredible human beings. So, you know, while you were writing this, while
[Amit Varma]: you were reading everything they wrote, while you were reading about their lives, while
[Amit Varma]: you were reading their debates, you know, do you go into rabbit holes when you think
[Amit Varma]: about what fascinating human beings these were? And what also struck me from just, you
[Amit Varma]: know, following your footnotes, and is that so many of the people who were speaking in
[Amit Varma]: these debates, whether in the Constituent Assembly debates, or the larger debate of
[Amit Varma]: ideas that went on were such incredible thinkers and speakers. And I don't, I contrast that
[Guest]: with today and I'm like, what the fuck? No, I mean, they are incredible. And I think that
[Guest]: they are remarkable human beings. And I think they have remarkable lives. And you also get
[Amit Varma]: a sense of when their reasons for something are actually a rationalization for an impulse
[Guest]: otherwise held. Yeah, I think you do. I mean, they one of the joys and one of the tragedies
[Guest]: in some sense of working on the on a project like this is that you're exposed to extraordinary
[Guest]: people. And of course, that that's a it's a joy because it's a treat. It's a tragedy
[Guest]: because you realize how distant they are from the historical imagination of the current
[Guest]: moment. But they have they also just have very interesting lives. I'm not sure our lives
[Amit Varma]: will ever be so interesting. Yeah, they lived in different times. And as I have said a couple
[Amit Varma]: of times on the show, they were responding to different incentives. So that's why you
[Amit Varma]: got those kinds of politicians and not the ones you have today, who are mainly motivated
[Amit Varma]: by the lust for power. So, you know, just tell me, so just looking at current times,
[Amit Varma]: what is the relevance of the Constitution? And I asked this in two parts. Part one is
[Amit Varma]: that, you know, it's been called a periodical and not not a book, it's so easy to change
[Amit Varma]: this government might well have the numbers to do it at some point in time. What is there
[Amit Varma]: for the relevance and part two is that even if it wasn't so easy to change, like you
[Amit Varma]: pointed out when we were discussing free speech and the caveats, that the execution can often
[Amit Varma]: stray very far away from what the Constitution intended. So if you know, what is the theory
[Amit Varma]: in the Constitution is not reflected in practice in the political economy and in our society,
[Guest]: then what's the point? How relevant is it? Really? I mean, I think look, it is not relevant
[Guest]: in the sense that if political elites don't take it seriously, like I said, it's not relevant,
[Guest]: right. And it's like one of the things I often tell people is look, the Constitution won't
[Guest]: save Indian democracy, Indian democracy may save the Constitution. I think it's relevant
[Guest]: because above all, it's a charter for what equality and freedom mean. Right. And I think
[Guest]: it's relevant because it is a certain commitment to a certain kind of framework. And if people
[Guest]: take that framework seriously, then it has the chance for a sustainable political environment.
[Guest]: And it has a chance for a certain vision of freedom.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, my final question, then for someone who has spent a certain amount of time living
[Amit Varma]: in the past, by which I mean these decades when these debates took place, and by inhabiting
[Amit Varma]: that space, and by someone who is at the same time, alive right now and seeing our modern
[Amit Varma]: ferments and torments looking forward, say over a 20 year period, what gives you hope
[Guest]: and what gives you despair? I think the thing that gives me hope is that
[Guest]: political life is extraordinarily contingent. And that just means that even your worst fears
[Guest]: may be undone by some new contingency. I think what gives me fear is the fact that it is
[Guest]: only some kind of contingency that might be able to save us.
[Amit Varma]: Madhav, thanks so much for coming on the show. I enjoyed reading your book and I enjoyed
[Amit Varma]: chatting with you. I hope it's a first for many.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you so much. Thanks.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to this episode, hop on over to your nearest bookstore online
[Amit Varma]: or offline and buy India's Founding Moment by Madhav Khosla. You can follow Madhav on
[Amit Varma]: Twitter at Madkhosla. That's one word Madkhosla. You can follow me on Twitter at Amit Verma
[Amit Varma]: A-M-I-T-V-A-R-M-A. You can browse past episodes of The Seen and the Unseen at seenunseen.in
[Amit Varma]: and thinkdragati.com. The Seen and the Unseen is supported by the Takshashila Institution.
[Amit Varma]: You can find out all about the incredible public policy courses at takshashila.org.in.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you for listening.